REFERENCE ONLY - NO PDF ATTACHED
An integrated view of the structure and function of the human 4D nucleome
Authors: J. Dekker, B. A. Oksuz, Yang Zhang, Ye Wang, Miriam K. Minsk, Shuzhen Kuang, Liyan Yang, J. Gibcus, Nils Krietenstein, Oliver J Rando, Jie Xu, D. Janssens, Steven Henikoff, A. Kukalev, Willemin Andréa, Warren Winick-Ng, Rieke Kempfer, Ana Pombo, Miao Yu, Pradeep Kumar, Liguo Zhang, Andrew S. Belmont, Takayo Sasaki, Tom van Schaik, Laura Brueckner, Daan Peric-Hupkes, B. van Steensel, Ping Wang, Haoxi Chai, Minji Kim, Yijun Ruan, Ran Zhang, SA Quinodoz, Prashant Bhat, M. Guttman, Wenxin Zhao, Shu Chien, Yuan Liu, Sergey V. Venev, Dariusz Plewczyński, Ibai Irastorza Azcarate, Dominik Szabó, Christoph J. Thieme, Teresa Szczepińska, Mateusz Chiliński, Kaustav Sengupta, Mattia Conte, Andrea Esposito, Alex Abraham, Ruochi Zhang, Yuchuan Wang, Xingzhao Wen, Qiuyang Wu, Yang Yang, Jie Liu, L. Boninsegna, Aslı Yıldırım, Yuxiang Zhan, A. Chiariello, Simona Bianco, Lindsay Lee, Ming Hu, Yun Li, R. J. Barnett, Ashley L. Cook, Daniel J. Emerson, Claire Marchal, Peiyao Zhao, Peter J. Park, Burak H Alver, Andrew J. Schroeder, Rahi Navelkar, Clara Bakker, William Ronchetti, Shannon R. Ehmsen, Alexander D. Veit, Nils Gehlenborg, Ting Wang, Daofeng Li, Xiaotao Wang, Mario Nicodemi, Bing Ren, Sheng Zhong, Jennifer E. Phillips-Cremins, David M. Gilbert, Katherine S. Pollard, Frank Alber, Jian Ma, W. Noble, Feng Yue
Year: 2025
Venue: Nature
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-025-09890-3
URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/376c7aa7da9195c4ec11c0015d608d47cf9af797
Abstract: The dynamic three-dimensional (3D) organization of the human genome (the 4D nucleome) is linked to genome function. Here we describe efforts by the 4D Nucleome Project1 to map and analyse the 4D nucleome in widely used H1 human embryonic stem cells and immortalized fibroblasts (HFFc6). We produced and integrated diverse genomic datasets of the 4D nucleome, each contributing unique observations, which enabled us to assemble extensive catalogues of more than 140,000 looping interactions per cell type, to generate detailed classifications and annotations of chromosomal domain types and their subnuclear positions, and to obtain single-cell 3D models of the nuclear environment of all genes including their long-range interactions with distal elements. Through extensive benchmarking, we describe the unique strengths of different genomic assays for studying the 4D nucleome, providing guidelines for future studies. Three-dimensional models of population-based and individual cell-to-cell variation in genome structure showed connections between chromosome folding, nuclear organization, chromatin looping, gene transcription and DNA replication. Finally, we demonstrate the use of computational methods to predict genome folding from DNA sequence, which will facilitate the discovery of potential effects of genetic variants, including variants associated with disease, on genome structure and function. The 4D Nucleome Project demonstrates the use of genomic assays and computational methods to measure genome folding and then predict genomic structure from DNA sequence, facilitating the discovery of potential effects of genetic variants, including variants associated with disease, on genome structure and function.
BibTeX key: dekker2025integrated
