REFERENCE ONLY - NO PDF ATTACHED
Multiphase separation in postsynaptic density regulated by membrane geometry via interaction valency and volume
Authors: Risa Yamada, Giovani B. Brandani, Shoji Takada
Year: 2025
Venue: eLife
DOI: 10.1101/2025.02.19.638939
URL: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/411f192da5d23032d6bf8dd4f3924e29f90db0cf
Abstract: Biomolecular condensates are found at various cellular locations, nucleus, cytoplasm, and membrane. These condensates often contain multiple components and can separate into multiple phases with various morphologies such as core-shell droplets, implicating functional roles. Demixing and arrangements of condensates are determined by competitive interactions and their locations. Recent studies reported a puzzling multiphase morphology in postsynaptic density components: AMPA-receptor, NMDA-receptor, PSD-95, and CaMKII. The multiphase morphology appears reversed when transitioning from the solution to the membrane. Using this system as a model, we study the multiphase behavior of condensates in solution (3D) and domain formation on and beneath the membrane (2D) and elucidate molecular mechanisms behind the puzzle. Our simulations reproduce the core-shell structure in 3D in vitro solution, where AMPA-receptor/PSD-95 form the core and NMDA-receptor/CaMKII form the shell, triggered by CaMKII activation. Then, we obtain a reversed morphology on the membrane. This reversal is primarily driven by CaMKII’s high valency and large volume. We find that, in solution, CaMKII’s non-specific volume interaction dominate, while on the membrane, specific multivalent interactions overcome the excluded volume interaction of CaMKII. The layered structures of receptors and CaMKIIs reduce the excluded volume effects of CaMKII on receptors, making the multivalent interaction dominant. These findings highlight the differences between condensate formation in solution and membrane domain formation, modulated by their layered arrangement. Significance Many proteins form condensates in cells, which are often further separated into two or more phases, implicating functional roles. Recent experiments on postsynaptic density proteins provide an interesting puzzle on a multiphasic morphology; while they form core-shell droplets with AMPA-receptor at the core and NMDA receptor in the shell in soluble constructs, the multiphase morphology is reversed when they form nanodomains on the membrane. This study identifies the mechanism behind the puzzle by using computer simulations with a mesoscale model. While active CaMKII, an inducer of the multiphase morphology, has dominant non-specific volume interactions in solution, its specific domain-domain multivalent interaction overcomes the volume interaction under the membrane with their layered arrangement.
BibTeX key: yamada2025postsynaptic
