[Page 1]

Published online 31 March 2020

doi: 10.1093/nargab/lqaa020

PHi-C: deciphering Hi-C data into polymer dynamics Soya Shinkai 1,2,* , Masaki Nakagawa 2,3 , Takeshi Sugawara2,4 , Yuichi Togashi 2,5,6 , Hiroshi Ochiai 5,7 , Ryuichiro Nakato 8 , Yuichi Taniguchi 7,9 and Shuichi Onami 1,* Laboratory for Developmental Dynamics, RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research, Kobe 650-0047, Japan, 2 Research Center for the Mathematics on Chromatin Live Dynamics, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8530, Japan, 3 Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University, Suita 565-0871, Japan, 4 Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan, Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan, Laboratory for Cell Field Structure, RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-0046, Japan, 7 PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kawaguchi 332-0012, Japan, 8 Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan and 9 Laboratory for Cell Systems Control, RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research, Suita 565-0874, Japan Received July 18, 2019; Revised February 26, 2020; Editorial Decision March 10, 2020; Accepted March 13, 2020

ABSTRACT Genomes are spatiotemporally organized within the cell nucleus. Genome-wide chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C) technologies have uncovered the 3D genome organization. Furthermore, live-cell imaging experiments have revealed that genomes are functional in 4D. Although computational modeling methods can convert 2D Hi-C data into populationaveraged static 3D genome models, exploring 4D genome nature based on 2D Hi-C data remains lacking. Here, we describe a 4D simulation method, PHiC (polymer dynamics deciphered from Hi-C data), that depicts 4D genome features from 2D Hi-C data by polymer modeling. PHi-C allows users to interpret 2D Hi-C data as physical interaction parameters within single chromosomes. The physical interaction parameters can then be used in the simulations and analyses to demonstrate dynamic characteristics of genomic loci and chromosomes as observed in live-cell imaging experiments. PHi-C is available at https://github.com/soyashinkai/PHi-C. INTRODUCTION Genomes consist of 1D DNA sequences and are spatiotemporally organized within the cell nucleus. Contact frequencies in the form of matrix data, measured using genomewide chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C) technologies, have uncovered 3D features of average genome organization in a cell population (1,2). Moreover, live-cell imaging experiments can reveal dynamic chromatin organization in response to biological perturbations within single cells (3–

5). Proper expression of genes should require orchestration of their regulatory elements within the dynamic 3D genome organization. Bridging the gap between these different sets of data derived from population and single cells is a challenge for modeling dynamic genome organization (6,7). Every Hi-C experiment provides 2D contact matrix data for a population of cells. Several computational modeling methods have been developed to reconstruct populationaveraged static 3D genome structures from 2D contact matrix data and predict Hi-C data (8–10). In addition, there has been the development of not only bioinformatic normalization techniques in Hi-C matrix data processing to reduce experimental biases by matrix balancing (11–13) but also probabilistic modeling to eliminate systematic biases (14,15). However, the meaning of a contact matrix as quantitative probability data has not been discussed; moreover, both a concept and a computational method to explore dynamic 3D genome organization remain lacking. Here, we propose PHi-C (polymer dynamics deciphered from Hi-C data), a simulation tool that can overcome these challenges by polymer modeling from a mathematical perspective and at low computational cost. PHi-C is a method that deciphers Hi-C data into polymer dynamics simulations (Figure 1). PHi-C uses Hi-C contact matrix data generated from a hic file through JUICER (16) as input (Supplementary Figure S1A). PHi-C assumes that a genomic region of interest at an appropriate resolution can be modeled using a polymer network model, in which one monomer corresponds to the genomic bin size of the contact matrix data with attractive and repulsive interaction parameters between all pairs of monomers described as matrix data (see the ‘Materials and Methods’ section). Instead of finding optimized 3D conformations, we can utilize the optimization procedure (Supplementary Figure S1B and S1C) to ob-

* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81 78 306 0111; Fax: +81 78 306 3442; Email: sonami@riken.jp

Correspondence may also be addressed to Soya Shinkai. Tel: +81 78 306 0111; Fax: +81 78 306 3442; Email: soya.shinkai@riken.jp The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com

[Page 2]

is expressed by b (17). The linearity of the harmonic springs enables us to analytically calculate the probability of the conformation r i j = Ri − R j between the ith and jth monomers as follows: p(r i j )dr i j = where (2π i2j )−3/2 exp [−(x2 + y2 + z2 )/2i2j ] dx dy dz,

i2j = r i2j /3 is the variance for space coordinate (i.e. x, y, z). Then, the probability density for the distance function exp (−ri2j /2i2j ). ri j = |r i j | becomes p(ri j ) = 2/π i−3 ij So far, a mathematical expression to define contacts within the contact distance σ has been written by 0 p(ri j ) dri j (7,18). However, the expression makes it difficult to improve further analytical calculations. Therefore, we introduced the contact Gaussian kernel with σ (Figure 2). Then, the contact probability between the ith and jth monomers is represented by ∞ Ci j ∝ 0 p(ri j ) exp (−ri2j /2σ 2 ) dri j . Finally, under the normalization Cii = 1, the contact probability can be expressed as Ci j = 1 + Figure 2. (Upper) In the bead–spring model, the probability density of the distance rij between the ith and jth beads (or monomers) is characterized by only the standard deviation ij . (Lower) The contact Gaussian kernel function can capture contacts with the contact distance σ .

tain optimal interaction parameters of the polymer network model by using an analytical relationship between the parameters and the contact matrix. We can then reconstruct an optimized contact matrix validated by input Hi-C matrix data using Pearson’s correlation r. Finally, we can perform polymer dynamics simulations of the polymer network model equipped with the optimal interaction parameters. MATERIALS AND METHODS Defining contacts in polymer modeling The bead–spring model in polymer physics consists of N beads (or monomers) connected by N − 1 harmonic springs along the polymer backbone (Figure 2), where a polymer

conformation is represented by Ri = Ri,x , Ri,y , Ri,z i =0 and the characteristic length between adjacent monomers

i2j σ2

−3/2

,

which means that the ratio of the conformational fluctuation ij to the contact distance σ is a physically important parameter to define the contacts. Note that Equation (1) was also recently derived with a similar consideration (19). Matrix transformations between polymer network model and contact matrix The polymer network model is a generalized model of the bead–spring model and the Gaussian network model (20– 22), and is characterized by the interaction matrix K = ki j , which is an N × N matrix for an N-monomer polymer system. The element kij generally represents the intensity of attractive or repulsive interaction between the ith and jth monomers. Therefore, the matrix satisfies kii = 0 and K = KT . Basically, the elastic force between two monomers results from an attractive interaction with a positive value. Furthermore, here, we take into account negative values, which represent repulsive interactions between monomers. Through analytical calculations in the theoretical framework of the polymer network model (see Supplementary

Figure 1. Overview of PHi-C pipeline. Hi-C contact matrix data generated from a hic file through JUICER are deciphered by the PHi-C optimization algorithm based on the polymer network model. Then, 4D polymer dynamics simulations of the polymer network model with the optimized interaction parameters are carried out.

[Page 3]

Overview of PHi-C PHi-C enables us to decipher Hi-C data into polymer dynamics simulation. PHi-C is based on the theory of the polymer network model and defining contacts between two monomers on the polymer (Supplementary Data). The theoretical framework provides the following matrix transformations (Figure 3), where the matrix size is N × N: (i) the normalized interaction matrix K̄ = (σ 2 /3kB T) ki j = k̄i j

into the normalized Laplacian matrix L̄ = (σ 2 /3kB T) Li j by L̄ = D̄ − K̄, where the normalized degree matrix D̄ = diag D̄0 , D̄1 , . . . , D̄N−1 , where D̄i = N−1 j =0 k̄i j . (ii) As L̄ is real symmetric, L̄ is diagonalizable. Furthermore, as long as L̄ is positive semidefinite, the N eigenvalues satisfy 0 = λ̄0 < λ̄1 ≤ λ̄2 ≤ · · · ≤ λ̄ N−1 . Therefore, L̄ can be transformed into the normalized covariance matrix

relative to the center of mass M̄ = (3kB T/σ 2 ) M =

−1 −1 −1 by M̄ = Q diag 0, λ̄1 , λ̄2 , . . . , λ̄ N−1 QT , M̄i j where Q is the orthogonal matrix satisfying

(iii) M̄ into QT L̄Q = diag 0, λ̄1 , λ̄2 , . . . , λ̄ N−1 .

̄ the normalized variance matrix = i j /σ =

̄ 2 into the contact maM̄ii + M̄j j − 2 M̄i j /3 . (iv)

−3/2 ̄2 . Note that the normalized trix C = Ci j = 1 + Laplacian matrix L̄ should be positive semidefinite. In terms of physics, the positive semidefiniteness is a necessary and sufficient condition for the stability of the polymer network model (Supplementary Data). Therefore, the normalized interaction matrix K̄ is restricted by the positive-semidefinite condition of L̄. Theoretically, the matrix transformations between K̄ and C are invertible, and we had found the inverse matrix transformations from C to K̄. However, when we apply the inverse transformations to experimental Hi-C data, it does not work. The reason is that the inverse-transformed Laplacian matrix does not satisfy the positive-semidefinite condition. That is, we could not use the inverse matrix transformations straightforwardly. Thus, we developed an optimization procedure, described below, to obtain an optimal interaction matrix K̄optimized from an experimental contact matrix CHi-C . The matrix K̄ describing attractive and repulsive interactions of the polymer network model is optimized so that the difference between an input Hi-C contact matrix CHi-C and the reconstructed contact matrix Creconstructed , through the above transformations, is minimized. Finally, a 4D simulation of the polymer network model with the optimized matrix K̄optimized is performed. Below, we describe each step in Figure 1 in detail. Input data. PHi-C requires N × N contact matrix data for a genomic region of interest as an input, which are gen-

erated through the JUICER and JUICER TOOLS (16) from public Hi-C data with a normalization option (VC/VC SQRT/KR). Here, we used the KR normalization (23). In our theoretical framework, the diagonal elements of the contact matrix should satisfy Cii = 1, so we additionally normalized the contact matrix such that the shape of the contact probability as a function of genomic distance P(s) is unaltered, with an interpolation if needed (Supplementary Figure S1A). Note that the interpolation may result in artifacts for sparse contact matrix data. Besides, our physical assumption for the polymer network model in the equilibrium state requires that an input contact matrix should be dense so that each element value of the contact matrix has a meaning as a probability. Therefore, according to the depth of sequence reads, the matrix size N and the binning resolution should be tuned so that a contact matrix becomes as dense as possible with fewer interpolations. Finally, we obtained a normalized Hi-C contact matrix CHi-C . Optimization and validation. The optimization algorithm is designed to minimize the Frobenius norm || log10 Creconstructed − log10 CHi-C ||F as a cost function, where the contact matrix Creconstructed is generated from the normalized interaction matrix K̄. At every optimization step, an integer pair (i, j) is randomly selected, and the values of k̄i j and k̄ ji are slightly altered. If the alteration decreases the cost function, the matrix K̄ is updated, and the positive semidefiniteness of the Laplacian matrix generated from the updated K̄ is checked. A flowchart of the algorithm is presented in Supplementary Figure S1B. As our optimization method is based on the random sampling of integer pairs, the amount of calculation in the procedure is proportional to O(N2 ). In our demo codes, the hyperparameters for the optimization are tuned, and it takes ∼13 min to obtain an optimized solution for N = 97, even on our laptop PC (Intel® CoreTM i7-6600U, dual-core 2.60 GHz). Detail benchmarks in the optimization procedure with changing matrix size are summarized at https://github.com/soyashinkai/ PHi-C#benchmark-of-the-optimization-procedure. After optimization, an optimized contact matrix Coptimized is converted from an optimized matrix K̄optimized . To assess the compatibility between contact matrices Coptimized and CHi-C in a logarithmic scale, we used Pearson’s correlation coefficient r. Polymer dynamics simulation. We performed 4D simulations of the polymer network model by using the normalized interaction matrix K̄. First, K̄ = k̄i j is converted into the normalized Laplacian matrix L̄. Using the eigendecomposition of the matrix L̄, the normalized eigenval N−1 ues λ̄ p p=0 and the orthogonal matrix Q are obtained. For a normalized polymer conformation vector R̄α = (R0,α /σ, R1,α /σ, . . . , RN−1,α /σ )T , where Ri,α stands for the α (= x, y, z) coordinate of the ith monomer, the conT verted 2 vector X̄ α = Q R̄α satisfies the variance relationship X̄ p,α = 1/(3λ̄ p ) for p = 1, 2, . . . , N − 1. Therefore, an initial conformation of the converted vector in thermal equilibrium is given: X̄0,α t=0 = 0, so that the center of mass is

the origin and X̄ p,α t=0 is a random variable obeying the

Data), we found matrix transformations between the interaction matrix of the network model K and the con polymer tact matrix C = Ci j (Figure 3): K L M 2 C, where the matrices L, M and 2 represent the Laplacian, covariance and variance matrices, respectively. The analytical matrix transformations are straightforwardly implemented in our Python codes using the NumPy package.

[Page 4]

normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 1/(3λ̄ p ) for p = 1, 2, . . . , N − 1. Then, the initial normalized conformation in thermal equilibrium is calculated as R̄α t=0 =

Q X̄ α t=0 . Finally, to calculate the polymer dynamics, we numerically integrated the stochastic differential equation (SDE) by using Heun’s method (24): the integral algorithm assures the second-order convergence in (25) and is defined by first predicting √

R̄α t̃ = R̄α t − 3 L̄ R̄α t + 2 ξ α ,

tures (Figure 4A): (i) the ratio σ /b results in a rounded shape at a small genomic distance and (ii) the fractal dimension determines the scaling at a large genomic distance,

and then correcting

Fitting contact probability

R̄α t+ = R̄α t − 3 L̄

R̄α + R̄α

t̃

+

√

2 ξ α ,

where the vector ξ α = (ξ0,α , ξ1,α , . . . , ξ N−1,α )T consists of random variables ξi,α i =0 obeying the normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 1. The parameter = kB T t/γ σ 2 is nondimensional and represents a normalized step time, and it determines the accuracy of the SDE integration. t stands for the step time of the integration in actual time. Here, we set = 0.0001. Visualization of polymer conformation. The code for polymer dynamics simulation outputs XYZ and PSF files to visualize the simulated polymer dynamics. Polymer conformations were visualized using VMD (26) by reading these files. Contact probability of fractal polymers When a polymer globule composed of N monomers is organized with the average diameter R, the average polymer conformation can be characterized by the scaling law R ∝ N1/df , where df represent the fractal dimension. Here, the fractal polymer with df is a generalized model of the bead– spring model with the scaling i2j = (b2 /3)|i − j |2/df , and the fractal dimension can characterize polymer condensation states (27,28) (Supplementary Figure S2A). Substituting the scaling into Equation (1), we obtained a mathematical relation for the contact probability as a function of genomic distance s,

s 2/df −3/2 P(s) = 1 + , 3(σ/b)2 c where c is the genomic size corresponding to a modeled monomer. Theoretical curves for the decay show two fea-

P(s) ∼ s −3/df .

Equations (4) and (5) allow us to extract physical information, σ /b and df , from experimental P(s) data by fitting the parameters.

In terms of the fractal polymer, the contact probability, P(s), from high-resolution Hi-C data was fitted by Equations (4) and (5) for small and large genomic regions, respectively. The ratio σ /b and the fractal dimension df are the fitted parameters, and c stands for the genomic size corresponding to the bin size of the Hi-C matrix. We used the nonlinear least-squares Marquardt–Levenberg algorithm on GNUPLOT.

Calculating mean-squared displacement of genome loci We re-analyzed movements of Nanog and Oct4 loci in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) measured by Ochiai et al. (29). In each session of live imaging, 3D time series of a genome locus (Nanog or Oct4) and the nucleus cen M−1

M−1 ter of mass, Slocus (tm ) m=0 and Snucleus (tm ) m=0 , were simultaneously acquired, where the maximum frame number was M = 50, the time interval was t = 10 s and tm = m t (m = 0, 1, 2, . . . , M − 1). To eliminate the effect of the nucleus movement, we dealt with the locus movement relative to the nucleus center described by the time series

M−1 M−1 {S(tm )}m=0 = Slocus (tm ) − Snucleus (tm ) m=0 . Then, the timeaveraged mean-squared displacement (TAMSD) for a time M−1 series {S(tm )}m=0 was calculated as follows: M−1−m

[S(tm+i ) − S(ti )]2 . TAMSD(tm ) = M− m

i =0

Calculating theoretical MSD curve The optimized matrix K̄optimized derives a theoretical MSD curve for the ith monomer in the polymer network model as

Figure 3. The polymer network model is characterized by connectivity between all pairs of monomers, expressed by the interaction matrix kij . The matrix kij is reversibly converted into the contact matrix Cij through matrix transformations K L M 2 C. Each matrix has dimensionless values with a normalization factor.

[Page 5]

follows [Equation (S23) in Supplementary Data]: MSD(t; i ) = (t/ t) +2

1 − exp (−3λ̄ p (t/ t)) .(7) Qi2p λ̄−1

p=1

Here, not only is the MSD normalized by σ 2 in the length scale, but the time step is also normalized in time; that is, MSD/σ 2 and t/ t are dimensionless.

the 50.5-Mb genomic regions around Nanog and Oct4 loci in mESCs by calculating the radius of gyration. By using two integers nstart and nend corresponding to the 50.5-Mb region, the radius of gyration is calculated as

n end

R̄i − R̄G , R̄g = n end − n start + 1 i =n start

end where R̄G = [1/(n end − n start + 1)] in=n R̄i represents start the center of mass of the polymer conformation of the 50.5-Mb genomic region.

Calculating radius of gyration As we described in the ‘Polymer Dynamics Simulation’ section, a normalized polymer conformation

R̄i = ( R̄i,x , R̄i,y , R̄i,z ) i =0 in thermal equilibrium can be sampled on the basis of the optimized matrix K̄optimized . Therefore, we can estimate the physical conformations of

Simulating polymer dynamics during chromosome condensation We applied PHi-C to Hi-C data during mitotic chromosome formation in chicken DT-40 cells (30). We used the second dataset of chromosome 7 (binned at 100 kb) for

Figure 4. (A) Theoretical curves of the contact probability P(s) in Equation (4). P(s) is normalized by the value at s/c = |i − j| = 1, where i and j are monomer indices of the fractal polymer and c represents the genomic size corresponding to every monomer. (Left) P(s) for fixed df = 2.0 and σ /b = 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 and 5.0. (Right) P(s) for fixed σ /b = 1.0 and df = 1.5, 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0. Theoretical scaling relations, as in Equation (5), are shown. (B) Contact probability (blue) for yeast cells with 160-bp nucleosome resolution (31) as a function of genomic distance averaged across the genome, and the theoretically fitted curve (orange) at a small genomic distance.

[Page 6]

Calculating shape length of polymer conformation To quantify the characteristic shape of a polymer conformation R̄α α=x,y,z during chromosome condensation, we evaluated the characteristic shape lengths as an ellipsoidal conformation based on the gyration tensor G =

(1/N) R̄α · R̄β . We calculated the three eigenvalues g12 ≤ g22 ≤ g32 of the tensor G. Then, we adopted g3 and

(g12 + g22 )/2 as the characteristic shape lengths of the major and minor axes, respectively (Figure 7C).

Code availability Python codes of PHi-C are available at https://github.com/ soyashinkai/PHi-C. Data availability Published publicly available Hi-C data were used in this study: Ohno et al. (31) (BioProject: PRJNA427106), Rao et al. (12) (GEO: GSE63525), Bonev et al. (32) (GEO: GSE96107) and Gibcus et al. (30) (GEO: GSE102740). Input Hi-C matrix data of PHi-C were generated through the JUICER and JUICER TOOLS (16). RESULTS Validation of PHi-C’s theoretical assumption regarding chromosome contact First, we evaluated PHi-C’s theoretical assumption about chromosome contact. Here, we started with a simple polymer model called the bead–spring model, in which the characteristic length b between adjacent beads (or monomers) represents the physical size corresponding to one genomic bin of the contact matrix data (see the ‘Materials and Methods’ section). To mathematically define the contact between a pair of monomers, we introduced the contact Gaussian

kernel with the contact distance σ (Figure 2). Almost computational 3D genome modeling techniques have relied on a conventionally assumed mathematical relationship: Hi-C contact matrix data, Cij , should be a function of the spatial distance, rij , between the ith and jth monomers in a polymer model. Although this relationship is reasonable to elucidate the population-averaged static 3D genome structures, the assumption cannot be extended beyond a static perspective of the 3D genome. As shown in Equation (1), we elucidated the following relationship: the contact matrix data, Cij , is a function of not the spatial distance, rij , but the dynamic range, ij , between the ith and jth monomers in a polymer model. The dynamic property of chromatin fibers should contribute to the chromosome contacts in Hi-C experiments. The above mathematical assumption can be used to derive the theoretical scaling relationship of the contact probability, P(s) ∼ s −df /3 [Equation (5)], as a function of genomic distance s in terms of the fractal dimension of polymer organization df (27) (Supplementary Figure S2A). In addition, interestingly, the ratio of the contact distance to the length between adjacent monomers, σ /b, makes the shape of the contact probability rounder at a small genomic distance (Figure 4A). This phenomenon implies that the rounded shape conveys information about the ratio σ /b. As we predicted, such a rounded shape was observed in yeast Hi-C data at nucleosome resolution (binned at 160 bp) (31). The fitted value was σ /b = 1.12, supporting our theoretical framework about contact and suggesting that contacts mainly occur within a distance corresponding to the size of a nucleosome in this super-resolution Hi-C experiment (Figure 4B, Supplementary Figure S2B). Other highresolution Hi-C data for human GM12878 (12) revealed σ /b = 1.38, suggesting that cross-linking of Hi-C experiments almost exactly captures chromosome contacts with the binned resolution (Supplementary Figure S2C). Matrix transformations in PHi-C’s polymer modeling allow for fast optimization, painting any contact pattern and 4D simulations To decipher Hi-C contact matrix data computationally, the optimization procedure of PHi-C is essential and based on analytical matrix transformations between the polymer network model and the contact matrix (Figure 3, ‘Materials and Methods’ section). The matrix transformations provided us with a low computational cost optimization strategy that can be applied to find optimal interaction parameters of the polymer network model without sampling optimal static 3D polymer conformations (Supplementary Figure S1B and S1C). Moreover, we can depict any contact pattern in a moment by using the matrix transformations and perform polymer dynamics simulations by designing interactions in the polymer network model (Figure 5, Supplementary Videos S1–S3). Intra- and interdomain interactions generate a checkerboard pattern reminiscent of A/B compartments (1,2), and the attractive interaction domains form a combined domain (Figure 5A). Loop interactions show a clear punctate pattern (Figure 5B). Furthermore, we can depict a topologically associating domain (TAD)like pattern (1,2) by only tuning heterogeneous connectivity

the wild type at G2 (0 min), 5, 15, 30 and 60 min. We eliminated the centromere region due to the lack of associated read counts. Through the optimization of PHi-C, we obtained the optimized matrices K̄0 , K̄500 , K̄1500 , K̄3000 and K̄6000 , respectively (Supplementary Figure S5). Here, the suffix n of the matrix K̄n represents the time n/100 min for the Hi-C data. To simulate the polymer dynamics during chromosome condensation, we linearly interpo 6000 lated the matrices K̄n n=0 as follows: K̄n = K̄0 + (K̄500 − K̄0 ) × n/500 for 0 ≤ n < 500, K̄n = K̄500 + (K̄1500 − K̄500 ) × (n − 500)/1000 for 500 ≤ n < 1500, K̄n = K̄1500 + (K̄3000 − K̄1500 ) × (n − 1500)/1500 for 1500 ≤ n < 3000 and K̄n = K̄3000 + (K̄6000 − K̄3000 ) × (n − 3000)/3000 for 3000 ≤ n ≤ 6000. By using K̄0 , an initial polymer conformation was sampled. Then, the polymer dynamics between n/100 and (n + 1)/100 min was calculated by 1000 steps of numerical integration with K̄n based on the integral algorithm [Equations (2) and (3)). In the visualization, we fixed the center of mass of polymer conformations to the origin (Figure 7B, Supplementary Videos S4 and S5).

[Page 7]

along the polymer backbone, where less connected regions behave as domain boundaries (Figure 5C, left). The 3D conformation suggests that the boundary regions are physically elongated with insulating inter-TAD-like-domain interactions. In addition, the removal of a boundary part causes the adjacent domain fusion (Figure 5C, right) that reminds us of fusions of TADs (10,33). PHi-C analysis provides physical insights into dynamic genome organization of mouse embryonic stem cells So far, computational approaches to reconstruct static 3D genome structures from Hi-C data are not able to explain the dynamic movement of chromatin in living cells. However, our PHi-C method can provide not only 4D simulations but also the theoretical MSD curves as the dynamic features of chromatin. Therefore, we can compare and predict the differences in the dynamic movement of genomic loci based on Hi-C data. To investigate how PHi-C explains 4D features of chromosomes within living cells, we applied this approach to Hi-C data for mESCs (32). A live-cell imaging experiment showed a marked difference in the movements of Nanog and Oct4 loci in mESCs (29): statistically significant enhancement of Nanog diffusive movement compared with Oct4 diffusive movement was revealed (Supplementary Figure S3). The optimization step of the PHi-C analysis for chromosomes 6 and 17 provided optimized contact matrices with correlations of >97% between the Hi-C and optimized contact matrices (Figure 6A). The MSD curves that were theoretically derived from the optimized data for the Nanog locus on chromosome 6 and the Oct4 locus on chromosome 17 are consistent with the experimental dynamics (Figure 6B). We also compared the physical sizes of 50.5-Mb genomic regions around the Nanog and Oct4 loci, with the inclusion of several areas that highly interact with each locus, and observed more compact organization of the Nanog region (Figure 6C). Taking together, these findings indicate that PHi-C analysis can provide new insights into genome organization and dynamics: for example, a region

of 50.5 Mb around Nanog adopts a more compact organization than an equivalent region around Oct4, and the Nanog locus on chromosome 6 is more mobile than the Oct4 locus on chromosome 17 (Figure 6D). 4D simulations of PHi-C enable to demonstrate the dynamic chromosome condensation process of chicken cells Finally, we used PHi-C to demonstrate the dynamic chromosome condensation process for the highly synchronous entry of DT-40 cells, which revealed a pathway for mitotic chromosome formation (30). The optimized contact matrices at five different time points were reconstructed with high correlations (Figure 7A, Supplementary Figure S4). Using the optimized interaction parameters in the polymer network model (Supplementary Figure S5), we conducted 4D simulations starting from a comparatively elongated conformation at 0 min. The polymer conformation dynamically changed into a rod-shaped structure, revealing the condensation state of chromosomes at prometaphase (Figure 7B, Supplementary Videos S4 and S5). We evaluated dynamic changes in polymer conformations in simulations by calculating the characteristic shape lengths of the major and minor axes. As observed by microscopy, rapid and gradual decreases in the minor and major axes within 15 and 60 min indicated thin and thick rod-shaped formations, respectively (Figure 7C). In addition, the optimized interaction parameters averaged at each genomic separation represent not only strong compaction within 2 Mb during mitosis but also increase of periodicity of long-range attractive interactions from 3 to 12 Mb in prometaphase (Figure 7D). These physical findings are consistent with a helical organization in rodshaped chromosomes during prometaphase (30). DISCUSSION PHi-C provides dynamic 3D genome features by deciphering Hi-C data into polymer dynamics. In the development of the PHi-C method, the derivation of Equation (1) is critical to bridging the gap between the contact matrix data and

Figure 5. Painting contact patterns for intra- and interdomain interactions (A), loop interactions (B) and heterogeneous connectivity along the polymer backbone (C). (Upper) Designed interactions in the polymer network model. (Lower) Converted contact matrix, with a snapshot of polymer conformations in the polymer dynamics simulation (Supplementary Videos S1–S3). (C) TAD-like domains are highlighted by dashed lines. (Right) Removal of a domainboundary part (yellow) results in domain fusion.

[Page 8]

Figure 7. Demonstrations of PHi-C for Hi-C data of DT-40 cells. (A) PHi-C analysis for chromosome 7 of DT-40 cells at G2 (0 min), 5, 15, 30 and 60 min. Contact matrices of the Hi-C experiment with 100-kb bins (upper) and optimized contact matrices with the correlation value (lower). (B) Snapshots of polymer conformations in a 4D polymer dynamics simulation. (C) Time series of the shape lengths of the major (yellow) and minor (purple) axes for polymer conformations in 100 polymer simulations starting from the same initial conformation. Thick curves represent the averages. (D) Curves dynamics

of optimized interaction parameters, k̄i j , averaged at each genomic distance (separation, |i − j| × 100 kb). A triangle indicates a position of a local peak inducing compaction within 2 Mb. Arrows indicate positions of a local peak generating periodicity of attractive interactions around 4, 6 and 10 Mb at 15, 30 and 60 min, respectively.

the dynamics property of the polymer model. As shown in Figure 2, the Gaussian contact kernel with the contact distance σ is mathematically able to take into account variations of the chromosome contact distance in Hi-C experiments. In addition, our prediction that the finite contact distance affects the rounded shape of the contact probability P(s) was verified to super-resolution Hi-C data for yeast and human GM12878 cells (Figure 3, Supplementary Figure S2). At least, our mathematical consideration must be correct as a first approximation to understand the meaning of the contact frequency, but there would be a mathemati-

cal improvement to express the more detailed quantitative probability data. The PHi-C optimization procedure relies on the matrix transformations between the interaction matrix K of the polymer network model and the contact matrix C (Figure 3). Within the range of the theoretical framework, the relation K C means a one-to-one correspondence. There exists the analytical inverse transformation from C to K. However, applying the inverse transformation to experimental Hi-C data caused numerical divergence. Experimental noise of Hi-C data and the effect of the matrix normal-

Figure 6. Demonstrations of PHi-C for Hi-C data of mESCs. (A) PHi-C analysis for chromosomes 6 (left) and 17 (right) of mESCs. (Upper) Contact matrices of the Hi-C experiment (binned at 500 kb), and contact probabilities as a function of genomic distance. (Middle) 4C-like profiles of Nanog (left) and Oct4 (right) loci. High-interaction regions are highlighted (pink). (Lower) Optimized contact matrices by PHi-C, and correlation plots between log10 CHi-C and log10 Coptimized . (B) Theoretical MSD curves of Nanog and Oct4 loci. (C) Probability densities of the gyration radius of 105 conformations for the 50.5-Mb genomic regions around Nanog and Oct4 loci in mESCs. (D) Polymer models derived from PHi-C analysis for Nanog and Oct4 loci on chromosomes 6 and 17, respectively. Pink highlighted regions on the polymer models correspond to the regions in the 4C-like profile of (A).

[Page 9]

parameter to carry out the 4D simulations. The spatial and time scales are normalized by the physical parameters σ (m) and γ σ 2 /kB T (s), respectively (Supplementary Data). Fitting the MSD data, in live-cell imaging experiments, with the theoretical function [Equation (S23) in Supplementary Data] could determine the parameters. We have shown that PHi-C can decipher Hi-C data into polymer dynamics, based on a mathematical theory of chromosome contacts in the polymer network model. As shown for mESC Hi-C data, PHi-C analysis can bridge the gap between Hi-C data and imaging data with respect to chromatin dynamics in living cells. In addition, PHi-C’s theoretical basis allows for the depiction of any Hi-C pattern by designing the appropriate interaction parameters, which supports a model for TAD formation: physical chromatin stiffness based on certain molecular interactions creates insulation at TAD boundaries (38). Polymer modeling studies have revealed that chromatin modifications alter the physical properties of chromatin fibers and affect chromosome organization (13,39). Because PHi-C analysis can extract physical interaction parameters from Hi-C data, it should be elucidated which molecular interactions on chromatin are related to physical parameters. Further comprehensive PHi-C analysis could provide physical insights into molecular interactions on chromosomes. SUPPLEMENTARY DATA Supplementary Data are available at NARGAB Online. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank K. Shiroguchi and K. Kinoshita for helpful comments. We thank M. Marti-Renom and M. Di Stefano for stimulative discussions. We thank I. Hiratani for critical reading of this manuscript. FUNDING JSPS KAKENHI [JP16H01408 and JP18H04720 to S.S., JP18H05412 to S.O.]; JST CREST [JPMJCR1511 to S.O.]. Conflict of interest statement. None declared. REFERENCES 1. Dekker,J., Marti-Renom,M.A. and Mirny,L.A. (2013) Exploring the three-dimensional organization of genomes: interpreting chromatin interaction data. Nat. Rev. Genet., 14, 390–403. 2. Bonev,B. and Cavalli,G. (2016) Organization and function of the 3D genome. Nat. Rev. Genet., 17, 661–678. 3. Nozaki,T., Imai,R., Tanbo,M., Nagashima,R., Tamura,S., Tani,T., Joti,Y., Tomita,M., Hibino,K., Kanemaki,M.T. et al. (2017) Dynamic organization of chromatin domains revealed by super-resolution live-cell imaging. Mol. Cell, 67, 282–293. 4. Hauer,M.H., Seeber,A., Singh,V., Thierry,R., Sack,R., Amitai,A., Kryzhanovska,M., Eglinger,J., Holcman,D., Owen-Hughes,T. et al. (2017) Histone degradation in response to DNA damage enhances chromatin dynamics and recombination rates. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., 24, 99–107. 5. Nagashima,R., Hibino,K., Ashwin,S.S., Babokhov,M., Fujishiro,S., Imai,R., Nozaki,T., Tamura,S., Tani,T., Kimura,H. et al. (2019) Single nucleosome imaging reveals loose genome chromatin networks via active RNA polymerase II. J. Cell Biol., 218, 1511–1530. 6. Marti-Renom,M.A. and Mirny,L.A. (2011) Bridging the resolution gap in structural modeling of 3D genome organization. PLoS Comput. Biol., 7, e1002125.

ization would be the reason. In the optimization algorithm, the Frobenius norm || log10 Creconstructed − log10 CHi-C ||F as a cost function allows for obtaining an optimized solution K̄optimized so that the logarithmic values of the reconstructed contact matrix data are close to the experimental Hi-C data. So far, the cost function is practically better in PHi-C, but there would be other cost functions. Further mathematical development regarding the optimization is needed. In principle, as shown in Figure 5, the matrix transformations enable us to depict any contact patterns. In other words, the interaction matrix K physically implies a mean field of the population-averaged chromosome folding. Therefore, our polymer modeling cannot take into account some active processes on chromosomes known as the loop extrusion model to explain the mechanisms of TAD formation (34). Recent experiments have shown that enrichment of specific proteins on TAD boundaries promotes such active processes to form TADs (35–37). However, as long as a reconstructed contact matrix by our PHi-C method shows a good agreement with an experimental contact matrix, the stochastic and dynamic nature in our polymer model might be a mechanism to maintain the TAD formation. Both GC content and mappability play non-negligible roles in predicting the contact probability between two regions (14). Besides, restriction enzyme sequence specificity means that the chimeric reads generated will have different lengths and occur at different densities. Although we presumed a fixed binning of the Hi-C data, variable-sized binning would be a better pre-process to normalize Hi-C data. In the polymer network model in our PHi-C method, the physical distance between adjacent beads [i.e. the ith and (i + 1)th beads] in 3D space relates to the matrix element ki,i+1 . Therefore, it is not essential how long each bead includes the genomic region. As long as an N × N variable-sized binning contact matrix is mathematically normalized in the sense of probability, we can apply our PHi-C method to the variablesized binning contact matrix. Our PHi-C method is not always applicable to all the input contact matrices. Our theoretical assumption of the polymer network model in the equilibrium state requires that a contact matrix should be dense, where each element value of the contact matrix has a meaning as a probability: given an interaction matrix K̄, all elements of the converted contact matrix C are nonzero. However, there would be a lot of sparse Hi-C matrices due to the depth of sequence reads and binning resolutions. Based on our benchmarking to carry out Hi-C procedures, the upper value of the matrix size would be N = 500 practically. We should develop a physical theory and computational methods for sparse and large-sized contact matrices. Unlike other computational modeling methods to reconstruct 3D genome structures, PHi-C requires only the contact matrix data for single chromosomes to convert into the interaction matrix of the polymer network model. Since the theory of the model assumes thermal equilibrium within a chromosome, the contact matrix data must be dense and deep so that the data can be characterized as a probability measure. Therefore, the bin size of the contact matrix data in the PHi-C analysis is limited according to the amount of the sequencing reads. Moreover, introducing additional physical parameters is not needed except for the nondimensional

[Page 10]

24. Sekimoto,K. (2010) Stochastic Energetics. In: Springer, Berlin. 25. Gardiner,C. (2009) Stochastic Methods: A Handbook for the Natural and Social Sciences. Springer, Berlin. 26. Humphrey,W., Dalke,A. and Schulten,K. (1996) VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J. Mol. Graph., 14, 33–38. 27. Shinkai,S., Nozaki,T., Maeshima,K. and Togashi,Y. (2016) Dynamic nucleosome movement provides structural information of topological chromatin domains in living human cells. PLoS Comput. Biol., 12, e1005136. 28. Shinkai,S., Nozaki,T., Maeshima,K. and Togashi,Y. (2017) Bridging the dynamics and organization of chromatin domains by mathematical modeling. Nucleus, 8, 353–359. 29. Ochiai,H., Sugawara,T. and Yamamoto,T. (2015) Simultaneous live imaging of the transcription and nuclear position of specific genes. Nucleic Acids Res., 43, e127. 30. Gibcus,J.H., Samejima,K., Goloborodko,A., Samejima,I., Naumova,N., Nuebler,J., Kanemaki,M.T., Xie,L., Paulson,J.R., Earnshaw,W.C. et al. (2018) A pathway for mitotic chromosome formation. Science, 359, eaao6135. 31. Ohno,M., Ando,T., Priest,D.G., Kumar,V., Yoshida,Y. and Taniguchi,Y. (2019) Sub-nucleosomal genome structure reveals distinct nucleosome folding motifs. Cell, 176, 520–534. 32. Bonev,B., Mendelson Cohen,N., Szabo,Q., Fritsch,L., Papadopoulos,G.L., Lubling,Y., Xu,X., Lv,X., Hugnot,J.-P., Tanay,A. et al. (2017) Multiscale 3D genome rewiring during mouse neural development. Cell, 171, 557–572. 33. Lupiáñez,D., Kraft,K., Heinrich,V., Krawitz,P., Brancati,F., Klopocki,E., Horn,D., Kayserili,H., Opitz,J., Laxova,R. et al. (2015) Disruptions of topological chromatin domains cause pathogenic rewiring of gene–enhancer interactions. Cell, 161, 1012–1025. 34. Fudenberg,G., Imakaev,M., Lu,C., Goloborodko,A., Abdennur,N. and Mirny,L.A. (2016) Formation of chromosomal domains by loop extrusion. Cell Rep., 15, 2038–2049. 35. Sanborn,A.L., Rao,S.S.P., Huang,S.-C., Durand,N.C., Huntley,M.H., Jewett,A.I., Bochkov,I.D., Chinnappan,D., Cutkosky,A., Li,J. et al. (2015) Chromatin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in wild-type and engineered genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 112, E6456–E6465. 36. Haarhuis,J.H., van der Weide,R.H., Blomen,V.A., Yáñez-Cuna,J.O., Amendola,M., van Ruiten,M.S., Krijger,P.H., Teunissen,H., Medema,R.H., van Steensel,B. et al. (2017) The cohesin release factor WAPL restricts chromatin loop extension. Cell, 169, 693–707. 37. Wutz,G., Várnai,C., Nagasaka,K., Cisneros,D.A., Stocsits,R.R., Tang,W., Schoenfelder,S., Jessberger,G., Muhar,M., Hossain,M.J. et al. (2017) Topologically associating domains and chromatin loops depend on cohesin and are regulated by CTCF, WAPL, and PDS5 proteins. EMBO J., 36, 3573–3599. 38. Dixon,J., Gorkin,D. and Ren,B. (2016) Chromatin domains: the unit of chromosome organization. Mol. Cell, 62, 668–680. 39. Di Pierro,M., Cheng,R.R., Lieberman Aiden,E., Wolynes,P.G. and Onuchic,J.N. (2017) De novo prediction of human chromosome structures: epigenetic marking patterns encode genome architecture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 114, 12126–12131.

7. Fudenberg,G. and Imakaev,M. (2017) FISH-ing for captured contacts: towards reconciling FISH and 3C. Nat. Methods, 14, 673–678. 8. Serra,F., Di Stefano,M., Spill,Y.G., Cuartero,Y., Goodstadt,M., Baù,D. and Marti-Renom,M.A. (2015) Restraint-based three-dimensional modeling of genomes and genomic domains. FEBS Lett., 589, 2987–2995. 9. Paulsen,J., Sekelja,M., Oldenburg,A.R., Barateau,A., Briand,N., Delbarre,E., Shah,A., Sørensen,A.L., Vigouroux,C., Buendia,B. et al. (2017) Chrom3D: three-dimensional genome modeling from Hi-C and nuclear lamin–genome contacts. Genome Biol., 18, 21. 10. Bianco,S., Lupiáñez,D.G., Chiariello,A.M., Annunziatella,C., Kraft,K., Schøpflin,R., Wittler,L., Andrey,G., Vingron,M., Pombo,A. et al. (2018) Polymer physics predicts the effects of structural variants on chromatin architecture. Nat. Genet., 50, 662–667. 11. Imakaev,M., Fudenberg,G., McCord,R.P., Naumova,N., Goloborodko,A., Lajoie,B.R., Dekker,J. and Mirny,L.A. (2012) Iterative correction of Hi-C data reveals hallmarks of chromosome organization. Nat. Methods, 9, 999–1003. 12. Rao,S.P., Huntley,M., Durand,N., Stamenova,E., Bochkov,I., Robinson,J., Sanborn,A., Machol,I., Omer,A., Lander,E. et al. (2014) A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping. Cell, 159, 1665–1680. 13. Serra,F., Baù,D., Goodstadt,M., Castillo,D., Filion,G.J. and Marti-Renom,M.A. (2017) Automatic analysis and 3D-modelling of Hi-C data using TADbit reveals structural features of the fly chromatin colors. PLoS Comput. Biol., 13, e1005665. 14. Yaffe,E. and Tanay,A. (2011) Probabilistic modeling of Hi-C contact maps eliminates systematic biases to characterize global chromosomal architecture. Nat. Genet., 43, 1059–1065. 15. Hu,M., Deng,K., Selvaraj,S., Qin,Z., Ren,B. and Liu,J.S. (2012) HiCNorm: removing biases in Hi-C data via Poisson regression. Bioinformatics, 28, 3131–3133. 16. Durand,N.C., Shamim,M.S., Machol,I., Rao,S.S., Huntley,M.H., Lander,E.S. and Aiden,E.L. (2016) Juicer provides a one-click system for analyzing loop-resolution Hi-C experiments. Cell Syst., 3, 95–98. 17. Doi,M. and Edwards,S.F. (1988) In: The Theory of Polymer Dynamics. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 18. Giorgetti,L. and Heard,E. (2016) Closing the loop: 3C versus DNA FISH. Genome Biol., 17, 215. 19. Le Treut,G., Képès,F. and Orland,H. (2018) A polymer model for the quantitative reconstruction of chromosome architecture from HiC and GAM data. Biophys. J., 115, 2286–2294. 20. Bahar,I., Atilgan,A.R. and Erman,B. (1997) Direct evaluation of thermal fluctuations in proteins using a single-parameter harmonic potential. Fold. Des., 2, 173–181. 21. Sauerwald,N., Zhang,S., Kingsford,C. and Bahar,I. (2017) Chromosomal dynamics predicted by an elastic network model explains genome-wide accessibility and long-range couplings. Nucleic Acids Res., 45, 3663–3673. 22. Grimm,J. and Dolgushev,M. (2018) Dynamics of networks in a viscoelastic and active environment. Soft Matter, 14, 1171–1180. 23. Knight,P.A. and Ruiz,D. (2012) A fast algorithm for matrix balancing. IMA J. Numer. Anal., 33, 1029–1047.
