[Page 1]

pubs.acs.org/Biomac

Charge-Based Engineering of Hydrophobin HFBI: Effect on Interfacial Assembly and Interactions Michael Lienemann,† Mathias S. Grunér,†,‡,§ Arja Paananen,† Matti Siika-aho,† and Markus B. Linder*,‡ †

VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Tietotie 2, Fi-02150 Espoo, Finland Department of Biotechnology and Chemical Technology, School of Chemical Technology, Aalto University, P.O. Box 16100, Fi-00076 Aalto, Finland

‡

Downloaded via KYOTO UNIV on February 3, 2023 at 04:05:36 (UTC). See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

S Supporting Information *

ABSTRACT: Hydrophobins are extracellular proteins produced by filamentous fungi. They show a variety of functions at interfaces that help fungi to adapt to their environment by, for example, adhesion, formation of coatings, and lowering the surface tension of water. Hydrophobins fold into a globular structure and have a distinct hydrophobic patch on their surface that makes these proteins amphiphilic. Their amphiphilicity implies interfacial assembly, but observations indicate that intermolecular interactions also contribute to their functional properties. Here, we used the class II hydrophobin HFBI from Trichoderma reesei as a model to understand the structural basis for the function of hydrophobins. Four different variants were made in which charged residues were mutated. The residues were chosen to probe the role of different regions of the hydrophilic part of the proteins. Effects of the mutations were studied by analyzing the formation and structure of self-assembled layers, multimerization in solution, surface adhesion, binding of secondary layers of proteins on hydrophobins, and the viscoelastic behavior of the air− water interface during formation of protein films; the comparison showed clear differences between variants only in the last two analyses. Surface viscoelasticity behavior suggests that the formation of surface layers is regulated by specific interactions that lead to docking of proteins to each other. One set of mutations led to assemblies with a remarkably high elasticity at the air−water interface (1.44 N/m). The variation of binding of secondary layers of protein on surface-adsorbed hydrophobins suggest a mechanism for a proposed function of hydrophobins, namely, that hydrophobins can act as a specific adhesive layer for the binding of macromolecules to interfaces.

INTRODUCTION Hydrophobins are extracellular proteins that are unique to filamentous fungi and show functions that are related to the control of interfaces. In various organisms, several different types of interfacial functions have been reported, including adhesion, coatings, and enhancing aerial growth.1−8 Due to the special properties of hydrophobins and because they can be prepared as pure substances, they have become attractive for use in several types of technical applications. These include dispersion of insoluble drug compounds, production of stable edible foams, protein immobilization, and stabilization of colloidal dispersions.9−11 Because of the high performance of hydrophobins for these applications, there is also the interesting possibility of studying them as biomimetic models for the development of new surfactants. Self-assembly has a major role for the structural basis of function in hydrophobins. Characterization and sequence analysis have led to the grouping of hydrophobins into two main classes: class I and class II. Overall, the two classes share the same structural theme, but they differ in the way that they form assembled structures and consequently show differences © 2015 American Chemical Society

in the properties of these structures. The following discussion and conclusions relate to class II proteins, and only further work can reveal relations to the behavior of class I members. Structural analysis based mostly on the hydrophobins HFBI and HFBII from Trichoderma reesei have shown that the proteins have a compact globular fold with a large part of the aliphatic hydrophobic side chains collected in one patch on the surface. The patch comprises about 18% of the surface area and leads to an amphiphilic structure.12 The relatively large size of the hydrophobic patch makes the structure reminiscent of a class of synthetic colloids that are called Janus-particles, which also have a structural division into hydrophobic and hydrophilic parts.13 One interesting aspect of such large amphiphilic structures relates to the finding that hydrophobicity is a sizedependent phenomenon.14 Large amphiphiles may therefore have significantly different properties compared to those of smaller amphiphiles. However, when analyzing interfaces of Received: January 17, 2015 Revised: February 26, 2015 Published: February 27, 2015

[Page 2]

assembled hydrophobins with AFM and diffraction techniques, it was clearly revealed that the hydrophobins organize into regular structures with defined repeating units.15 Interestingly, the dimensions of the repeating units were greater than the dimensions of individual protein molecules.16 The formation of these regular patterns suggests that the functionality of the hydrophobins stem from more complex interactions than mere amphiphilicity and that, for example, intermolecular interactions could play an important role in forming assemblies with several hierarchical levels. Also, some of the functions of hydrophobins, such as their exceptionally high surface elasticity, suggest that intermolecular bonding would contribute to their function.17 A detailed structure−function understanding of hydrophobins would have implications for understanding their biological roles as well as understanding their applicability for technical use. Here, one aspect of their study is noteworthy. Fungi have evolved to use hydrophobins for multiple tasks, and most fungal genomes contain multiple copies of hydrophobins that may have different expression profiles. Deletion mutant phenotypes are typically difficult to characterize, apparently because of functional compensation by other hydrophobins. As with their physiological functions, there is not a single characteristic assay that can reveal the functionality of purified hydrophobins in structure−function studies. Instead, the functionality must be inferred from a set of measurements that can include adhesion, formation of multimers in solution, formation of interfacial structures, and others. In this work, we used point mutations to gain understanding regarding the structure−function relationships in HFBI from T. reesei, which belongs to class II hydrophobins. We focused on charged residues because these are most likely to affect the way that the surface-exposed residues interact, and at the same time, these mutations were unlikely to affect the hydrophobic patch. Also, an initial set of variants made with fusion proteins of HFBI and green fluorescent protein (GFP) suggested that such mutations affect protein−protein interactions in HFBI.18

Figure 1. (A) Three-dimensional structure of T. reesei hydrophobin HFBI (PDB ID 2FZ6). Basic and acidic residues are annotated and colored blue and red, respectively. The protein binds to hydrophobic substrates and the air−water interface through the hydrophobic patch. The figure was produced using PyMOL.33 (B) Computational model of an HFBI monolayer with 6-fold symmetry (referred to as β structure by Magarkar et al.19). The side chain atoms of the mutated residues are shown as sticks, oxygen, in red, and nitrogen, in blue. The positions of the mutated side residues in the HFBI sequence are indicated by coloring of the side chain carbon atoms (e.g., orange, D30; cyan, K32, dark green, D40; magenta, D43; yellow, R45; light green, K50). Individual HFBI molecules of the pore-forming hexamer complex are highlighted by shading. The pores in the protein layer are flanked by the negatively charged side chains of residues D40 and D43 as well as the positively charged side chain of R45. The figure was produced using the UCSF Chimera package.34 plating on hygromycin-containing top agar (150 μg/mL) and consecutive transfer to agar plates containing 0.1% (w/v) Triton X100 and hygromycin (125 μg/mL). hf b2 gene disruption was confirmed by PCR (Phire Plant Direct PCR kit) (Thermo, Finnzymes) using two probes that were complementary to the hph resistance marker (hph_sekv 1:5′-ATT CTT CGC CCT CCG AGA GC-3′) and the hfb2 region located upstream of the deletion cassette insertion (Mil73_fw: 5′-GAA TCA TGC TGG AGT GAA GG-3′). In addition, the absence of HFBII in the culture supernatant was confirmed by western blotting (4−20% acrylamide Criterion gradient gel, Bio-Rad, with HFBII-specific polyclonal antibodies). The T. reesei hf b2::hph strain was named VTT D-121447. Variant-producing strains were made using VTT D-121447 by insertion of the mutated hfb1 gene into the genome by homologous recombination. The HFBI gene insertion was performed into the highly expressed cbh1 gene using plasmids that contained an insertion cassette consisting of the acetamide resistance gene amdS and a HFBI variant gene for one of the variants (e.g., pMil003, D40Q/D43N/ R45Q/K50Q; pMil004, D40Q/D43N; pMil005, R45Q/K50Q; and pMil006, D30N/K32Q). The insertion resulted in disruption of the cbh1 gene and placement of the HFBI variant genes under the control of the cbh1 promoter. Homologous recombination and clone selection was performed as described above with the exception that acetamide (10 mM) was used as a selective antibiotic. Acetamide-resistant clones were analyzed for HFBI variant gene insertion by sequencing using primers that bind to the CBHI promoter (T010_Cbh1 prom 5′ sekv: 5′-CAA CTC AGA TCC TCC AGG AGA C-3′) and CBHI terminator (T043_Cbh1_term_R sekv: 5′-TCA TGA TAC GGG CTC ACC AAG-3′). These genetic modifications yielded four novel T. reesei strains that were named D-121448 (D40Q/D43N/R45Q/ K50Q), D-121449 (D40Q/D43N), D-121450 (R45Q/K50Q), and D121451 (D30N/K32Q). The production of the four HFBI variants was performed in 1 L of minimal medium (TrMM, pH 5.2), which had the following composition: 0.11 M KH2PO4, 38 mM (NH4)2SO4, 2.4 mM MgSO4, 4.1 mM CaCl2, 0.18 mM FeSO4·7 H2O, 95 μM MnSO4· H2O, 49 μM ZnSO4·H2O, 0.16 mM CoCl2·6 H2O, and 2% (w/v) glucose) supplemented with 4% (w/v) lactose and 2% (w/v) spent grain extract. The fungal cultivation was performed in shake flasks for 7 days at 28 °C with 200 rpm shaking, after which the culture liquid was stored frozen until further processing.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Design of Mutations. The structure of HFBI shows six charged residues that are exposed on its surface (Figure 1A). Four of these are located on the face of the protein that is opposite to the hydrophobic patch (i.e., D40, D43, R45, and K50). The remaining two (D30 and K32) are located near the edge of the hydrophobic patch (see also Supporting Information Figure 2). Because of these structural arrangements, we designed the mutant variants so that the regions were probed separately. The charged residues proximal to the hydrophobic patch (D30 and K32) were also identified in computational studies as being potentially important for intermolecular interactions (Figure 1B).19 These residues were exchanged for electrically neutral ones in the variant D30N/K32Q. The four charged residues on the face opposite the hydrophobic patch were studied in three different variants. Neutralizing the positively charged residues gave the negatively charged variant R45Q/K50Q, neutralizing the negatively charged residues gave the positively charged variant D40Q/ D43N, and all the charged residues on this face were neutralized in the third variant, D40Q/D43N/R45Q/K50Q. Production of HFBI Variants in T. reesei. The T. reesei production strain M219 was used for construction of the HFBI variant-producing Trichoderma strains. As a first step, the hfb2 gene was disrupted by insertion of a hygromycin resistance cassette from the plasmid pTNS2720 in order to prevent copurification of naturally secreted HFBII hydrophobin during HFBI variant purification from the supernatant. The cassette was amplified from plasmid pTNS27 as described previously.21 Knockout mutants were isolated by initial

[Page 3]

Purification of HFBI Variants from T. reesei Culture Supernatant. Purification of the HFBI variants was performed using a combination of protein separation in an aqueous two-phase system (ATPS) and reversed-phase chromatography essentially as described previously.22 Initially, the frozen fungal culture liquid was thawed in a water bath at 22 °C for 1 h, and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 4400g for 25 min and gravity filtration of the supernatant through grade 597-1/2 quantitative folded filter paper with pore size of 4−7 μm (Whatman PLC, UK). The pH of the filtered solution was adjusted to 5 by addition of 1 M sodium acetate solution. Berol 532 detergent (Akzo Nobel N.V., The Netherlands) was added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 2% (w/v). The solution was mixed by gentle shaking and allowed to separate in a separation funnel. The detergent phase was isolated followed by addition of 20 mL of 50 mM sodium acetate buffer (pH 5.15) containing 40 mM EDTA and 0.18 mL of isobutanol. The mixture was mixed gently, and the phases were allowed to separate in a separation funnel. The lower phase was purified further by preparative reversedphase chromatography using a Vydac C4 (1 × 20 cm) column and a gradient elution from an aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid to 100% acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. HFBI variant proteins eluting as fractions with a high absorption at λ = 230 nm were pooled and lyophilized. Reagents and Chemicals. T. reesei endoglucanase II EGII (Tr Cel5A) was purified as described previously,23 xylanases XYNI and XYNII were purified according to a published method,24 but in the case of TrXYNI the last gel filtration step was omitted, and cellobiohydrolase I CBHI (Tr Cel7A) was prepared as previously described.25 Glucose oxidase from Aspergillus niger (GOx) and 1hexanethiol were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Germany). Measurement of Zeta Potential. The samples were prepared by dissolving lyophilized wild type and variants of HFBI in water at a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL, and the pH was titrated to values between 1.5 and 9.5 depending on the variant using 100 mM and 1.0 M HCl and 10 and 100 mM NaOH. The zeta potential was measured using a Zetasizer Nano-ZS instrument (Malvern, UK) and a sample volume of 1.0 mL. Size-Exclusion Chromatography (SEC). HFBI variants dissolved in 100 μL of buffer were injected at a series of concentrations onto a Superdex 75 column (GE, Sweden) and eluted with 10 mM Naacetate at pH 5.5 containing 0.2 M NaCl using an Ä kta Explorer (GE, Sweden) chromatography system. Protein elution was detected at λ = 230 nm. Standard proteins were injected to calibrate the elution time against the protein molecular weight. The references used were vitamin B-12 (1.4 kDa, Sigma), aprotinin (6.5 kDa, Sigma), ribonuclease A (13.7 kDa, GE, Sweden), and ovalbumin (43.0 kDa, GE, Sweden). Drop Flattening Measurements. The time required for the formation of a flat plateau on top of a drop of an aqueous solution of hydrophobin was measured with an optical contact angle and surface tensiometer (CAM 200, KSV NIMA, Finland). The experiment was done by dissolving the protein in water and placing 50 μL of this solution on Parafilm. This technique, which addresses a characteristic feature in hydrophobins, was earlier described and discussed in ref 15. Images were taken with 60 s intervals in order to register the time at which the drop started to flatten on the top. Triplicate experiments were performed for each variant. Formation and Static Analysis of HFBI Monolayers. Formation of HFBI variant monolayers was analyzed in a humidified atmosphere using a Langmuir trough and presoaked 20.6 mm perimeter Wilhelmy paper plates (KSV NIMA, Finland). Surface pressure was monitored by probing 20 mL of 5 mM Na-acetate (pH 5.5) in a glass beaker of 4.7 cm diameter that had been equilibrated to room temperature. The sample protein was dissolved at a concentration of 0.85−1.0 μM by short magnetic stirring (1.5−2 min), and the change of surface pressure was monitored until equilibrium was reached (typically, after 30 min to 1 h). In the experiment, the Wilhelmy plate was submerged prior to protein addition.

HFBI Layer Compression Assay Using the Langmuir Trough. Monolayers of HFBI variants were assembled, and their structural properties were measured using a KSV Minimicro trough (KSV NIMA, Finland). Protein layers were prepared at the air−water interface by injecting 20 μg of dissolved protein into 55 mL of 5 mM Na-acetate buffer (pH 5.5) at 21 °C. This solution was left for 45 min in order to allow the hydrophobin proteins to reach equilibrium. Compression/expansion cycle isotherms were recorded while moving the barriers at a constant rate of 2 mm/min and switching to expansion at 35 mN/m surface pressure. Interfacial Rheology. The interfacial shear rheological properties of wild-type HFBI and HFBI variants at the air−water interface were measured at RT using a DHR-2 rheometer (TA Instruments, UK) equipped with a Pt−Ir du Noüy ring (13 mm diameter, Krüss, Germany, flamed prior to use) in oscillatory mode. The concentrations of stock solutions of HFBI and HFBI variants were determined by UPLC. A 0.3 μM solution (≈ 2.3 μg/mL = 0.00023% (w/v)) of HFBI (or variant) in water was prepared to a 50 mL volumetric flask and allowed to temper to RT (22 °C) for 1 h prior to experiments. The solution was placed in a 60 mm diameter glass dish, and the du Noüy ring was placed onto the surface according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The interfacial shear elastic (storage) modulus, G′, and viscous (loss) modulus, G′′, were monitored at constant frequency of 0.1 Hz and constant strain of 0.1% during film formation for at least 2 h to reach equilibrium. The chosen frequency and strain were measured to be in the linear viscoelastic region. Each measurement was replicated at least twice. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). A NanoScopeV Multimode8 AFM (E scanner, Bruker) and NCS15/AlBS cantilevers (μMasch, USA) were used in all measurements. All images were recorded in tapping mode in air with scan rates in the range of 0.7−1 Hz (free amplitude about, 0.68 V; damping ratio, 0.7−0.8). Images were flattened only to remove possible tilt in the image data (NanoScope Analysis), and no further processing was done. A scanning probe image processor (SPIP, Image Metrology, Denmark) was used for image analysis. The topography and phase contrast images were captured simultaneously. The phase contrast image shows the phase difference between the oscillations of the cantilever driving piezo and the detected oscillations. It is thought that image contrast is derived from surface properties such as stiffness and viscoelasticity (hard tapping) or hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity (light tapping), but it also shows enhanced edge structures. Protein Adsorption Using Quartz Crystal Microbalance with Dissipation Monitoring QCM-D. Hydrophobin adhesion and adsorption of sample proteins to HFBI variant layers at various pH values were monitored by QCM-D through measurement of frequency and dissipation (D4-QCM system, Biolin Scientific AB, Sweden). QCM sensors with a hydrophobic sensor surface were prepared by first cleaning gold-coated QCM sensor disks (model QSX301, Biolin Scientific AB, Sweden) in an UV/ozone chamber for 10 min and exposing them for another 10 min to a 5:1:1 mixture of water, H2O2, and an aqueous ammonia solution (25% w/w) at ∼75 °C. This was followed by thorough rinsing with water, drying under a stream of N2, and incubating for 2 min in ethanol (94% w/v). The prewetted sensors disks were immersed in a 50 mM 1-hexanethiol solution in ethanol and left to react at room temperature overnight. As a final step, unreacted 1-hexanethiol was washed off with ethanol and water, and the sensor was dried under a flow of N2. The QCM-D measurements were performed at 23 °C, and buffer/sample injection was performed at a rate of 0.1 mL/min. All buffers were degassed by vacuum filtration before use. HFBI variant adsorption was carried out by injection of 300 μL of protein sample solution at a concentration of 0.1 mg/mL. Unbound protein was removed from the sensor surface by rinsing at pH 5.5 using 10 mM Na-acetate buffer.

RESULTS Production of HFBI Variants. Secretion of HFBI variants was confirmed by western blot analysis using polyclonal HFBIspecific antibodies. The selected T. reesei strains produced the

[Page 4]

HFBI variants in the supernatant at high concentrations, allowing purification by ATPS and yielding 100−500 mg of protein per liter (D30N/K32Q, 244.7 mg/L; D40Q/D43N, 98.5 mg/L; R45Q/K50Q, 390 mg/L; and D40Q/D43N/ R45Q/K50Q, 504 mg/L). Zeta-potential measurements showed that the introduced amino acid substitutions resulted in changes of the isoelectric point, as expected, according to the type of the modified acid (Figure 2 and Table 1). The solubility

Figure 3. Concentration-dependent multimerization of HFBI variants, as determined by SEC. The calculated molecular weights of the main elution peaks are plotted against the concentration of the solution of the injected HFBI variant. Figure 2. Zeta potential of wild-type HFBI and variants D30N/K32Q, D40Q/D43N, R45Q/K50Q, and D40Q/D43N/R45Q/K50Q measured in 0.1 mg/mL protein solutions. From this plot, the isoelectric points were determined to be 6.1, 5.8, 7.0, 3.6, and 6.2, respectively.

top of a hydrophobin solution droplet is a characteristic property for HFBI. This is likely due to the formation of a hydrophobin monolayer at the air−water interface. In order to test the ability of the HFBI variants to show similar function, droplets of hydrophobin solution were left to evaporate, and the time necessary for plateau formation was determined using the surface tensiometer apparatus. All variants produced the same plateau effect, although the rate at which the plateau was formed showed some delay compared to that of the wild type. For the wild type, the time for formation was 19 ± 3.5 min, and for the variants, the time was typically 30−70% longer. In order to assess the protein concentration in these layers on a macroscopic scale, surface tension (γ) reduction upon HFBI variant layer formation at the air−water interface was measured using a Langmuir trough. These measurements showed that the four variants produced very similar layers (see Table 1) that resembled the wild-type layer (35.5 ± 1.6 mN/ m) closely. The molecular area that was occupied in the interfacial layers by the tested HFBI proteins was determined by repeated compression−expansion cycles. The protein layer densities of the HFBI variants were determined from the second compression isotherm and were found to be indistinguishable from that of the wild-type HFBI (3.23 ± 0.51 nm2; Table 1).

of all of the variants was very good and was similar to that of the wild type at least up to the highest tested concentrations of several milligrams per milliliter. Size-Exclusion Chromatography (SEC). The concentration-dependent multimerization of the four HFBI variants was analyzed by dissolving the protein at concentrations ranging between 3 μM and 1 mM, followed by separating over a SEC column and monitoring their elution. At concentrations below 30 μM, the four HFBI variants and the wild type eluted at similar elution times corresponding to a molecular weight of around 5 kDa as the monomer state (7.5 kDa). Larger complexes were formed when the hydrophobin concentration was increased above 100 μM (Figure 3). The concentration range at which the transition between these two states occurred was indistinguishable when comparing the wild type and the four variants and shows that the formation of complexes is a concentration-dependent equilibrium driven by high protein concentration. Assembly of Hydrophobin Variant Layers at the Air− Water Interface. The formation of a flattened plateau on the

Table 1. Experimental and Calculated Parameters for HFBI and the Different Variantsa MW (Da) IEP HAM (ng/cm2) MA (Å2) γ (mN/m) tDF (min)

wild type

D30N/K32Q

D40Q/D43N

R45Q/K50Q

D40Q/D43N/R45Q/K50Q

6.1 (5.7) 223 ± 98 323 ± 51 35.5 ± 1.6 19.0 ± 3.5

5.8 (5.7) 247 ± 35 322 ± 52 36.5 ± 0.0 24.3 ± 1.2

7.0 (8.2) 289 ± 45 323 ± 34 31.3 ± 7.5 32.3 ± 2.5

3.6 (3.9) 217 ± 35 324 ± 55 36.0 ± 0.6 23.7 ± 3.8

6.2 (5.5) 293 ± 56 343 ± 38 36.6 ± 0.3 31.3 ± 3.5

MW, experimentally determined molecular weight according to MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry; IEP, isoelectric point determined from duplicate measurements with theoretical value based on amino acid sequence given in brackets; HAM, hydrophobically adsorbed mass, which was determined from the presented QCM experiments on hexanethiol coated surfaces; MA, molecular area; and γ, surface tension of HFBI variant solutions, which was determined from interfacial HFBI protein layers assembled in a Langmuir trough. Time required for plateau formation on hydrophobin variant droplets (tDF) was measured in triplicate.

[Page 5]

Interfacial Rheology of Hydrophobin Variant Layers. The adsorption of wild-type HFBI and HFBI variants to the air−water interface was monitored and viscoelastic properties were determined by interfacial shear rheology measurements. The storage modulus (elastic, G′) and loss modulus (viscous, G′′) of the interfacial hydrophobin layers are shown in Figure 4A,B, respectively. At equilibrium, the shear storage modulus,

Figure 5. AFM images of LB films of HFBI variants that were assembled at the air−water interface, transferred to a flat mica substrate, dried, and imaged in air using tapping mode. Displayed are typical 200 nm phase images of HFBI variants D30N/K32Q, D40Q/ D43N, R45Q/K50Q, and D40Q/D43N/R45Q/K50Q (A−D, respectively).

to smaller rafts during film transfer onto mica. The crystallinity of the protein films was confirmed by Fourier transformation of the phase contrast image data. The oblique structures of all HFBI variants possessed unit cell vector dimensions of 5.4 ± 0.9 nm for a and b and 120 ± 12° for Υ. The values for wildtype HFBI were 5.6 ± 0.5 nm for a and b and 120 ± 7° for Υ. The deviation of the lattice constants from pure hexagonal packing (a = b and Υ = 120°) and differences between different samples are within the expected error limits set by scanner hysteresis, creep, and drift in the AFM. These errors can potentially lead to small differences in self-assembled structures of the HFBI variants going unnoticed. QCM Measurements of pH-Dependent Binding of Soluble Proteins to HFBI Variants. The binding of proteins to hydrophobin layers was investigated by QCM in order to determine whether the regular charge pattern of a HFBI monolayer (Figure 1B) was recognized by other proteins. This was done by adding secreted carbohydrate-active T. reesei enzymes and, as a reference, A. niger glucose oxidase to adsorbed layers of wild-type hydrophobin and the four variants, as outlined in Figure 6A,B. The adsorption to a hydrophobic hexanethiol-coated surface was found to be very similar among the tested HFBI variants (Table 1) and in the range of wildtype HFBI adsorption (223 ± 98 ng/cm2). Adsorbed layers of wild-type HFBI and variants bound the highest GOx amounts between pH 4.7 and 5.2 (Figure 7A). When compared to the wild type, the D30N/K32Q substitution resulted in a lower amount of adsorbed GOx, whereas layers of the other three variants bound more GOx than that of the wild type. In addition to this common GOx adsorption peak, a second GOx adsorption maximum at pH 6− 9 was measured for variant D40Q/D43N. Adsorbed layers of variants D30N/K32Q and D40Q/D43N/ R45Q/K50Q did not bind the T. reesei enzymes XYNI (pI 9),

Figure 4. Interfacial rheology data of wild-type HFBI and HFBI variants D30N/K32Q, D40Q/D43N, R45Q/K50Q, and D40Q/ D43N/R45Q/K50Q at the air−water interface as a function of adsorption time: (A) storage modulus, G′, and (B) loss modulus, G′′. The interfacial layers are adsorbed from 0.3 μM protein solutions.

G′, for wild-type HFBI reached a value of 1.04 ± 0.01 N/m, which is comparable to previously reported values for HFBI (0.7 N/m in ref 17). The corresponding values for HFBI variants D30N/K32Q, D40Q/D43N, R45Q/K50Q, and D40Q/D43N/R45Q/K50Q are 0.85 ± 0.10, 0.62 ± 0.01, 1.44 ± 0.03, and 1.09 ± 0.01 N/m, respectively. The G′ values are in a similar range or less than that for wild-type HFBI, except for the high value for R45Q/K50Q variant that showed a ∼40% increase in the elastic modulus. The equilibrium shear loss modulus values, G′′ (Figure 4B), for all hydrophobins were less than 0.06 N/m. Tan δ values at equilibrium were very low, less than 0.1, for all hydrophobins, showing dominance of the G′ values in all cases. AFM Imaging of Langmuir−Blodgett Films. AFM images of Langmuir−Blodgett films (LB films) of all HFBI variants showed regular ordered raft-like structures (Figure 5A−D). It is possible that at the air−water interface all protein films consisted of larger crystalline domains, which broke down

[Page 6]

Figure 6. (A) Schematic representation of the HFBI coated QCM sensor at which adsorption of non-HFBI proteins was measured. (B) Representative protein adsorption QCM experiment at pH 9.0 with HFBI variant D40Q/D43N: (A) injection of 0.03 mg of HFBI-D40Q/D43N in 10 mM Na-acetate buffer (pH 5.5), (B) removal of unbound hydrophobin by buffer rinsing, (C) equilibration with 10 mM glycine buffer (pH 9.0), (D) injection of 0.3 mg of glucose oxidase at pH 9.0, (E) washing off of unbound glucose oxidase, and (F) end of experiment. The adsorbed mass of the non-HFBI protein was calculated using the frequencies at points D and F.

XYNII (pI 5.5), CBHI (pI 3.7−4.2), and EGII (pI 5.2) within the pH range of the experiments (Figure 7B−E). Similarly, wild-type HFBI and variants D40Q/D43N and R45Q/K50Q did not bind XYNI, EGII, and, in the case of wild type and variant R45Q/K50Q, also XYNII (Figure 7B,C,E). In the case of CBHI, however, binding to wild-type HFBI and variants D40Q/D43N and R45Q/K50Q was detected between pH 3.9 and 4.7 (Figure 7D) and was much higher for D40Q/D43N (570 ng/cm2 at pH 4.7) than that for the wild type (60 ng/cm2 at pH 3.9) and R45Q/K50Q (20 ng/cm2 at pH 3.9). XYNII did bind exclusively variant D40Q/D43N and exhibited a binding maximum of 100 ng/cm2 at around pH 5.2, whereas basal adsorption of around 60 ng/cm2 was measured throughout the probed pH range with this variant (Figure 7C).

patterns as have been demonstrated previously for wild type. When we studied how wild type and variants bound to solid surfaces, we obtained nearly identical binding capacities as well as viscoelastic properties for the adsorbed layers. When comparing expression levels of the variants and wild type, we noted that expression levels of the variants in solution tended to be somewhat higher than seen for the wild type. Zetapotential measurements showed differences in the isoelectric points between variants that were in line with the change of charge due to mutations, but they did not indicate any direct functional difference. For D40Q/D43N, the difference in predicted pI and zero zeta potential was the largest. Such differences can indicate that the local environment in the protein affects the ionization state of the side chains and that this may have an effect on the function of these side chains. As noted below, this particular variant shows some significant functional differences that may be linked to this observation. However, in two clearly different and quantifiable sets of experiments, differences between variants and wild type were seen. One was the interfacial rheology properties, and the other was in how immobilized surface films of the variants interact with other proteins. By interfacial rheology, we were able to follow events leading to the formation of films at the air−water interface (Figure 4). A characteristic feature of the film formation was the remarkably long lag time before the onset of significant increase in G′ and G′′. This lag time and the order in which the variants performed was reproducible, i.e., the time of the onset of an increase in G′ and G′′ was reproducibly the shortest for D30N/K32Q and longest for D40Q/D43N. Although the D30N/K32Q variant showed a shorter time before the onset of an increase in G′ and G′′ than that of the other variants, the overall rate of change was slower than that for the wild type and the other variants. However, the loss modulus increased most rapidly for D30N/K32Q. As shown in Figure 8A, results from structural analysis show that D30 and K32 are located on the lateral sides of adjacent HFBI molecules, where they can participate in forming ionic bonds between molecules.19 The location of these residues and the effect on function, therefore, suggests that these residues have a role in the mechanism of initial docking of the proteins and also

DISCUSSION

High-resolution imaging, modeling, and exceptional properties suggest that structurally defined interactions and specific molecular docking play important roles in the formation of the interfacial layers of HFBI and similar hydrophobins. Here, point mutations were made in order to perturb molecular interactions and thereby gain insight into the structural basis of the function of HFBI. We made mutations with different combinations of charged residues that were changed into sterically related noncharged homologues. Three of the variants of HFBI probed the surface region opposite the hydrophobic patch (e.g., D40Q/D43N, R45Q/K50Q, and D40Q/D43N/ R45Q/K50Q). In a fourth variant (D30N/K32Q), the two charged residues close to the hydrophobic patch were investigated (Figure 1A). Many of the methods used for functional characterization did not reveal any differences between variants. For instance, gel filtration showed that multimerization depends on the solution concentration of protein and did not differ significantly between wild type and variants. Additionally, all mutated variants formed interfacial films in a similar way, as shown both by how such films are formed spontaneously on the top of a drop as well as in the Langmuir trough. By high-resolution AFM, the films of the variants had the same distinct structural

[Page 7]

Figure 7. pH-dependent adsorption of non-HFBI proteins to adsorbed layers of wild-type HFBI and HFBI variants D30N/K32Q, D40Q/D34N, D40Q/D34N/R45Q/K50Q, and R45Q/K50Q determined by QCM-D. The injected non-HFBI proteins were Aspergillus niger glucose oxidase (GOx) (A; pI 4.2) and the Trichoderma reesei proteins xylanase I (XYNI) (B; pI 9), xylanase II (XYNII) (C; pI 5.5), cellobiohydrolase I (CBHI) (D; pI 3.7−4.2), and endoglucanase II (EGII) (E; pI 5.2). The adsorption data on glucose oxidase binding to wild-type HFBI layers was originally published in ref 28.

on the lateral coherence of the molecules, as indicated by the relatively high G′′ compared to G′. This also implies that molecular recognition events kinetically control the mechanism by which elastic surface films form. The development of G′′ for the wild type also showed an interesting behavior in having a local minimum at around 40 min, but this minimum was missing from all of the variants. This indicates a mechanism in which intermediate forms exist and structural rearrangements occur during the assembly process.

The R45Q/K50Q mutant is interesting because it followed the behavior of the wild type but reached higher absolute values. The final value for G′ was very high (1.44 N/m), which, to our understanding, is the highest value for a protein film reported in the literature.17 Variant D40Q/D43N was clearly different than the rest, being significantly slower to assemble and not reaching the G′ values of the wild type. However, surprisingly, a combination of these two variants in D40Q/ D43N/R45Q/K50Q again compensated and led to a behavior that was close to the wild type and behaved approximately as an

[Page 8]

earlier suggested, the prevention or promotion of adhesion of secondary layers of proteins to hydrophobin may form an important part of their functions in vivo.27−29 One demonstration of such function is the recruitment of enzymatic functionalities on surfaces, leading to enhanced enzymatic activities on solid substrates.30 Another function is related to the role of hydrophobins as an adhesive for fungal mycelium to adhere to various structures.7 In both cases, an interaction must occur between the underlying hydrophobin film and subsequent layers. To study this interaction, we used a range of enzymes that are naturally produced by T. reesei (Figure 7). We did not expect that there would necessarily exist a natural interaction between the hydrophobin layer and these proteins, but they were chosen because they all are produced by the fungus and are known to be extracellular, highly soluble, and stable. The wild type and variants all interacted with GOx, as also previously shown for the wild type. The efficiency of the interaction depended on the variant, but, overall, we can conclude that GOx interacts strongly with HFBI and that the mutations generally did not change this behavior. Variant D40Q/D43N, however, showed interactions over a broader range of pH. For the other proteins studied (XYNI, XYNII, CBHI, EGII), only CBHI showed a differing behavior with one of the variants, D40Q/D43N. We conclude that structural changes in the film formed by this variant allowed an efficient interaction with CBHI. Interestingly, the change in adhesiveness among mutations was very selective, with only variant D40Q/D43N showing differing behavior and only with two proteins, CBHI and GOx. Although we cannot draw detailed conclusions on the nature of the interactions, these data suggest that interactions between hydrophobin layers and secondary adsorption can be very specific. The specificity of the interactions has a plausible structural basis in the fact that hydrophobins can arrange on interfaces to produce very organized structures (e.g., as in Figures 5 and 8B). When proteins assemble on these surfaces in defined orientations related to each other, they also form pores or pockets with structurally defined environments. It is well-known from, for example, work with cyclodextrins that such binding pockets can form very selective environments for specific interactions.31 We therefore suggest that the behavior of the variants indicates that the nanoscale structural environment provided by the hydrophobin layers have a role for the selectiveness of interactions for proteins binding to them. The finding that changing the charge landscape of the protein did not result in a predictable shift in adsorption optimum for the secondary protein layer also suggests that the structure of the hydrophobin layer forms an important contribution to its adsorption selectivity. The results discussed above support a view of HFBI and similar hydrophobins in which molecular interactions lead to self-assembled structures. Sequence comparison between closely related hydrophobins shows several locations with charged residues that have a high degree of conservation, such as around the 30 and 32 positions (see sequence alignment in Supporting Information, Figure 3). Asp30 is part of a conserved negatively charged loop that may contain up to four aspartates, as in the recently described class II hydrophobin NC2.32 More variation is seen around the region that forms an α-helix in HFBI and also contains charged residues in locations 40, 43, 45, and 50 in HFBI. On the basis of the current work, we can expect that these homologous hydrophobins will show an overall behavior in forming solution multimers, films at the air− water interface, and adsorption on solid surfaces that are very

Figure 8. (A) Side-view of a model for the membrane formed by HFBI.19 Residues D30 and K32 are located within the membrane and are positioned so that they can form ionic bonds between HFBI molecues. (B) View of the same HFBI membrane from its hydrophilic face. Residues D40, D43, R45, and K50 are exposed on the surface.

average of the two sets of mutations. As shown in Figure 8B, structural analysis shows that all of these residues are located on the hydrophilic part of the membrane and are not expected to be involved in direct molecular interactions between protein molecules. In principle, this result could be interpreted in two ways. The mutations may result in small conformational changes that are distant from the point of the mutation but fortuitously lead to changes in the fit between protein molecules. An alternative is that the mutations affect the way in which the hydrophilic face interacts with some other components in the water phase. We find it likely that these other components are other hydrophobin molecules. Earlier studies suggested that there is a continuous dynamic state between interface assembled hydrophobin and hydrophobin in solution.26 It is also easy to imagine that the mutations on the water-exposed face would affect such dynamic interactions, making this perhaps a more likely scenario than that of a fortuitous change in the three-dimensional structure leading to an increased fit. The second way in which the variants showed a behavior differing from that of the wild type was in the way in which surface films of hydrophobin interacted with other proteins. As

[Page 9]

close to that of HFBI. Properties such as how surface-bound layers will interact with other proteins may show differences. Perhaps more noticeable effects were initially expected because in a previous study we had identified that corresponding mutations in a GFP-HFBI fusion protein did result in strongly changed multimerization behavior.18 There is a strong difference in multimerization behavior of hydrophobins with and without fusion partners, where fusion proteins are much more sensitive to changes. Therefore, it clear that the linking of fusion partners affects the structural basis of interactions in hydrophobins. Since most functional characterizations did not reveal differences between variants, it is suggested that the basic amphiphilic architecture dictates their functions to a large extent. However, details of adhesive and interfacial behavior were affected. One especially remarkable function of HFBI and its variants is the extraordinary surface elasticity of films of these proteins at the air−water interface. Mutations affected mechanisms in subtle ways, but the end state was still formed in a very robust way. Therefore, it is likely that the functions arise from the formation of multiple interactions. The presence of multiple interactions together with the several ways in which hydrophobins show functionality (i.e., forming coatings, adhesion, surface tension) results in a very complex system where precise molecular interactions play an important role but where alternative arrangements and mechanisms are found.

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

*Tel.: +358-09 47001; E-mail: markus.linder@aalto.fi. Present Address §

(M.S.G.) Bimelix Ab, Torggatan 10, AX-22100 Mariehamn, Åland, Finland. Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the Academy of Finland through its Centres of Excellence Programme (2014−2019) and project nos. 131055 and 126572. Drs. Tiina Nakari-Setälä and Markku Saloheimo are thanked for providing vector pTNS27 and T. reesei strain M219, respectively, and for participating in helpful discussions related to strain development. Riitta Suihkonen, Päivi Matikainen, Heini Lehtonen, and Riitta Nurmi are thanked for excellent technical assistance. Dr. Dilek ErciliCura and Martina Lille are thanked for fruitful discussions related to interfacial rheology. Yoshijuki Takatsuji and Ryota Yamasaki are thanked for performing QCM-D measurements in which GOx binding to HFBI variant layers was quantified. Dr. Géza R. Szilvay is thanked for helpful discussions on the Class II hydrophobin protein sequence alignment. Anneloes Oude Vrielink is thanked for carrying out useful tests with a tensiometer.

CONCLUSIONS The structural basis for the functions of HFBI was probed by site-directed mutagenesis. The overall behavior of HFBI was surprisingly robust with very small differences noted in properties between wild type and variants by most of the methods of analysis. Changes were found in the surface elasticity of air−water films and in the way surface-bound films interacted with other proteins. This is significant because these are two properties that are characteristic of HFBI; no other molecules give rise to such high surface elasticity, and surface adhesion has an important biological function. The changes in surface elasticity can be interpreted as showing that there are interactions between proteins assembled at the air−water interface and other molecules in the water phase. The results also show that there are other interactions between side chains that affect lateral interactions between molecules at the air− water interface. The effects of mutations on how other molecules in solution interact with hydrophobin bound to solid surfaces support earlier findings that hydrophobins function as specific adhesive layers. We suggest a role of structurally defined surface pockets formed by the surfacebound hydrophobins. Finally, we note that some mutations caused a qualitative difference or enhancement in these functions, suggesting that the natural performance of these is finely tuned to match a specific function. This also suggests that it is possible to use molecular engineering to further tune these functions for new applications.

ABBREVIATIONS GFP, green fluorescent protein; ATPS, aqueous two-phase system; SEC, size-exclusion chromatography; QCM-D, quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring; AFM, atomic force microscopy; GOx, glucose oxidase; XYNI, xylanase I; XYNII xylanase II; CBHI, cellobiohydrolase I; EGII, endoglucanase II

REFERENCES

(1) Aimanianda, V.; Bayry, J.; Bozza, S.; Kniemeyer, O.; Perruccio, K.; Elluru, S. R.; Clavaud, C.; Paris, S.; Brakhage, A. A.; Kaveri, S. V.; Romani, L.; Latge, J. P. Surface hydrophobin prevents immune recognition of airborne fungal spores. Nature 2009, 460, 1117−1121. (2) Bayry, J.; Aimanianda, V.; Guijarro, J. I.; Sunde, M.; Latge, J. P. Hydrophobinsunique fungal proteins. PLoS Pathog. 2012, 5, e1002700. (3) Hektor, H. J.; Scholtmeijer, K. Hydrophobins: proteins with potential. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2005, 16, 434−439. (4) Kershaw, M. J.; Talbot, N. J. Hydrophobins and repellents: proteins with fundamental roles in fungal morphogenesis. Fungal Genet. Biol. 1998, 23, 18−33. (5) Linder, M. B. Hydrophobins: proteins that self assemble at interfaces. Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 2009, 14, 356−363. (6) Sunde, M.; Kwan, A. H. Y.; Templeton, M. D.; Beever, R. E.; Mackay, J. P. Structural analysis of hydrophobins. Micron 2008, 39, 773−784. (7) Wösten, H. A. B.; Schuren, F. H. J.; Wessels, J. G. H. Interfacial self-assembly of a hydrophobin into an amphipathic protein membrane mediates fungal attachment to hydrophobic surfaces. EMBO J. 1994, 13, 5848−5854. (8) Wösten, H. A. B.; van Wetter, M. A.; Lugones, L. G.; van der Mei, H. C.; Busscher, H. J.; Wessels, J. G. H. How a fungus escapes the water to grow into the air. Curr. Biol. 1999, 9, 85−88. (9) Valo, H. K.; Laaksonen, P. H.; Peltonen, L. J.; Linder, M. B.; Hirvonen, J. T.; Laaksonen, T. J. Multifunctional hydrophobin: toward functional coatings for drug nanoparticles. ACS Nano 2010, 4, 1750−

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

* Supporting Information

Figure S1: Mycelium of the grown fungus. Figure S2: Full sequence of HFBI with signal sequence. Figure S3: Sequence alignment with homologous proteins. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

[Page 10]

(29) Corvis, Y.; Walcarius, A.; Rink, R.; Mrabet, N. T.; Rogalska, E. Preparing catalytic surfaces for sensing applications by immobilizing enzymes via hydrophobin layers. Anal. Chem. 2005, 77, 1622−1630. (30) Takahashi, T.; Maeda, H.; Yoneda, S.; Ohtaki, S.; Yamagata, Y.; Hasegawa, F.; Gomi, K.; Nakajima, T.; Abe, K. The fungal hydrophobin RolA recruits polyesterase and laterally moves on hydrophobic surfaces. Mol. Microbiol. 2005, 57, 1780−1796. (31) Ling, X. Y.; Reinhoudt, D. N.; Huskens, J. Reversible attachment of nanostructures at molecular printboards through supramolecular glue. Chem. Mater. 2008, 20, 3574−3578. (32) Ren, Q.; Kwan, A. H.; Sunde, M. Solution structure and interface-driven self-assembly of NC2, a new member of the Class II hydrophobin proteins. Proteins 2013, 82, 990−1003. (33) DeLano, W. L. The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System; DeLano Scientific: San Carlos, CA, 2002. (34) Pettersen, E. F.; Goddard, T. D.; Huang, C. C.; Couch, G. S.; Greenblatt, D. M.; Meng, E. C.; Ferrin, T. E. UCSF chimeraa visualization system for exploratory research and analysis. J. Comput. Chem. 2004, 25, 1605−1612.

(10) Cox, A. R.; Aldred, D. L.; Russell, A. B. Exceptional stability of food foams using class II hydrophobin HFBII. Food Hydrocolloids 2009, 23, 366−376. (11) Lumsdon, S. O.; Green, J.; Stieglitz, B. Adsorption of hydrophobin proteins at hydrophobic and hydrophilic interfaces. Colloids Surf., B 2005, 44, 172−178. (12) Kallio, J. M.; Linder, M. B.; Rouvinen, J. Crystal structures of hydrophobin HFBII in the presence of detergent implicate the formation of fibrils and monolayer films. J. Biol. Chem. 2007, 282, 28733−28739. (13) Walther, A.; Müller, A. H. E. Janus particles: synthesis, selfassembly, physical properties, and applications. Chem. Rev. 2013, 113, 5194−5261. (14) Chandler, D. Interfaces and the driving force of hydrophobic assembly. Nature 2005, 437, 640−647. (15) Szilvay, G. R.; Paananen, A.; Laurikainen, K.; Vuorimaa, E.; Lemmetyinen, H.; Peltonen, J.; Linder, M. B. Self-assembled hydrophobin protein films at the air−water interface: structural analysis and molecular engineering. Biochemistry 2007, 46, 2345−2354. (16) Kisko, K.; Szilvay, G. R.; Vuorimaa, E.; Lemmetyinen, H.; Linder, M. B.; Torkkeli, M.; Serimaa, R. Self-assembled films of hydrophobin proteins HFBI and HFBII studied in situ at the air/water interface. Langmuir 2009, 25, 1612−1619. (17) Cox, A. R.; Cagnol, F.; Russell, A. B.; Izzard, M. J. Surface properties of class II hydrophobins from Trichoderma reesei and influence on bubble stability. Langmuir 2007, 23, 7995−8002. (18) Lienemann, M.; Gandier, J.-A.; Joensuu, J. J.; Iwanaga, A.; Takatsuji, Y.; Haruyama, T.; Master, E.; Tenkanen, M.; Linder, M. B. Structure−function relationships in hydrophobins: probing the role of charged side chains. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2013, 79, 5533−5538. (19) Magarkar, A.; Mele, N.; Abdel-Rahman, N.; Butcher, S.; Torkkeli, M.; Serimaa, R.; Paananen, A.; Linder, M.; Bunker, A. Hydrophobin film structure for HFBI and HFBII and mechanism for accelerated film formation. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2014, 7, e1003745. (20) Askolin, S.; Penttilä, M.; Wösten, H. A. B.; Nakari-Setälä, T. The Trichoderma reesei hydrophobin genes hfb1 and hfb2 have diverse functions in fungal development. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 2005, 253, 281−288. (21) Penttilä, M.; Nevalainen, H.; Ratto, M.; Salminen, E.; Knowles, J. A versatile transformation system for the cellulolytic filamentous fungus Trichoderma reesei. Gene 1987, 61, 155−164. (22) Paananen, A.; Vuorimaa, E.; Torkkeli, M.; Penttilä, M.; Kauranen, M.; Ikkala, O.; Lemmetyinen, H.; Serimaa, R.; Linder, M. B. Structural hierarchy in molecular films of two class II hydrophobins. Biochemistry 2003, 42, 5253−5258. (23) Suurnäkki, A.; Tenkanen, M.; Siika-Aho, M.; Niku-Paavola, M. L.; Viikari, L.; Buchert, J. Trichoderma reesei cellulases and their core domains in the hydrolysis and modification of chemical pulp. Cellulose 2000, 7, 189−209. (24) Tenkanen, M.; Puls, J.; Poutanen, K. Two major xylanases of Trichoderma reesei. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 1992, 14, 566−574. (25) Rahkamo, L.; Siika-Aho, M.; Vehviläinen, M.; Dolk, M.; Viikari, L.; Nousiainen, P.; Buchert, J. Modification of hardwood dissolving pulp with purified Trichoderma reesei cellulases. Cellulose 1996, 3, 153− (26) Krivosheeva, O.; Dedinaite, A.; Linder, M. B.; Tilton, R. D.; Claesson, P. M. Kinetic and equilibrium aspects of adsorption and desorption of class II hydrophobins HFBI and HFBII at silicon qxynitride/water and air/water interfaces. Langmuir 2013, 29, 2683− (27) von Vacano, B.; Xu, R.; Hirth, S.; Herzenstiel, I.; Ruckel, M.; Subkowski, T.; Baus, U. Hydrophobin can prevent secondary protein adsorption on hydrophobic substrates without exchange. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2011, 400, 2031−2040. (28) Wang, Z. F.; Lienemann, M.; Qiau, M.; Linder, M. B. Mechanisms of protein adhesion on surface films of hydrophobin. Langmuir 2010, 26, 8491−8496.
