[Page 1]

Single base pair twist defect driven re-positioning of nucleosomes: a computational analysis

T HESIS submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of M ASTER OF S CIENCE in P HYSICS Author : Student ID : Supervisor : 2nd corrector :

Jesse van Welzenes s2485664 Prof.dr. H. Schiessel Prof.dr.ir. S.J.T. van Noort

Leiden, The Netherlands, September 6, 2020

[Page 2]

Single base pair twist defect driven re-positioning of nucleosomes: a computational analysis Jesse van Welzenes Instituut-Lorentz, Leiden University P.O. Box 9500, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands September 6, 2020

Abstract Large DNA molecules are folded in cells of organisms on several hierarchical layers. The smallest scale folding-mechanism is the formation of nucleosomes. The nucleosomal structure however sterically hinders the transcription of the underlying DNA sequence. The sequential passing of mismatches in the initial structure of the nucleosome allows the nucleosome to re-position along the DNA, hereby uncovering regions of the DNA. This twist defect driven mobility of nucleosomes has been observed in crystal structures and all-atom simulations. We re-produce the simulation on mobile twist defects in nucleosomes in the already existing MonteCarlo based rigid base pair model. This allows us to effectively explore sequence-space for a torsionally frustrated nucleosome. We find estimations of the mobility of nucleosomes under the driving force of over- and undertwisted defects. On top of that we attempt to mutate the sequence in order to find a sequence on which a twist defect is preferred over the defect-free conformation of the nucleosome.

[Page 3]

Contents 1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Simulation set-up and theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2.1 The RPB model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2.2 Application of a twist defect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2.3 Integration of the adsorption energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 2.4 Implementation in the Markov Chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 2.5 From escape-probability to quasi diffusion constant . . . . . 11 3 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.1 Nucleosome positioning along the sequence . . . . . . . . . . 3.2 Estimation of the single-step diffusion constant . . . . . . . . 3.3 The effective diffusion of a nucleosome along the DNA . . . 3.4 Mutation Monte Carlo on a nucleosome containing a twist defect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5 Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

A Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.1 Auto-correlation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.2 Used DNA-sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.3 Error analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A.4 Used equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

[Page 4]

Chapter

Introduction Just as the spontaneous tangling of earphones in your pocket, the organised tangling of DNA is a phenomenon without a clear consistent cause. Whereas the tangling of earphones is mostly considered to be be unpleasant, the folding of DNA is for a good cause. Packaging DNA allows approximately 2 metres of DNA to fit in a micron-sized nucleus. [1] The folding of DNA finds place on a set of hierarchic levels with the fundamental level being the packaging of bare DNA into nucleosomes. The nucleosome is a 147 base pair (bp) DNA stretch, wrapped 1 3/4 times in a left-handed super-helical turn around a disk-shaped core. This core is an octamer composed of histone-proteins. [2] [3] [4] The folding of DNA makes regions of DNA located inside the nucleosomes inaccessible, hereby hindering the transcription of viable genetic information. An accurate positioning of nucleosomes along the DNA molecule is essential for granting access to the correct part of the genetic information. Earlier work has suggested that proteins are able to access wrapped DNA using either of two processes, nucleosome breathing and nucleosome re-positioning. Nucleosome breathing occurs when bound sites consecutively open due to thermal fluctuations. [2] [5] [6] Nucleosome repositioning occurs when the histone octamer slides along the DNA-molecule. The driving force behind this movement of a nucleosome is either the ATPdependent displacement of nucleosomes forced by chromatin remodelers or the spontaneous formation of defects which diffuse through the nucleosome. [7] These defects occur when a specific region, existing between two adjacent contact points of the DNA with the histone core (Super Helical Location or SHL), consists of a number of base pairs which is different from its equilibrium value. These mismatched regions could form under the driving force of thermal fluctuations, frequently at the termini of the

[Page 5]

Introduction

nucleosome. In the case of an extra base pair in a SHL, we have an undertwist (positive) defect. In the case of a missing base pair in a SHL, we have an overtwist (negative) defect. Consecutive end-to-end propagation of such a twist defect through all the SHLs would ultimately lead to the displacement of a nucleosome by 1 bp in total. [8] [7] Another mechanism of twist defect (TD) driven displacement is that of the formation of loops of DNA along the nucleosome, effectively making a nucleosome jump by 10 bp. [9] It is however the passive 1 bp displacement of nucleosomes that we are interested in, since this might uncover sequence-induced instructions to move nucleosomes. Nucleosome positions are partly embedded in the genetic code, although to which extend is still open for discussion. The intrinsic curvature of DNA introduces energetically cheap locations where nucleosomes concentrate. These locations have a high affinity for nucleosome positioning which in turn makes nucleosome-sliding events unlikely. [10] [11] However, spontaneous nucleosome sliding still occurs and the presence of twist defects in a nucleosome have been experimentally observed in crystal structures and in solution. [2] [12] [8] In recent studies this process has been analysed in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and estimates have been made of the effective diffusion rates of nucleosomes along various sequences. [2] [10] [7] Although these models are able to simulate experimental observations in great detail, an effective way of studying the sequence-dependency of the nucleosome re-positioning rate is not present in MD models. We therefore attempt to re-produce the propagation of a twist defect along a nucleosome in the Monte Carlo-based rigid base pair (RBP) model. The unique power of this model is that an immense portion of possible sequences can effectively be explored in order to find energetic minima of the studied system. [13] [4] Another feature of our work is the study on undertwist defects. In earlier work Brandani et al revealed the stability and existence of previously unobserved undertwisted regions within one helical pitch in all atom MD-simulations. [7] We therefore will study both the propagation of under- and overtwisted DNA defects along the nucleosome, resulting in a 1 bp displacement of the nucleosome. From these results we determine effective (quasi-) diffusion constants for nucleosomes on three different sequences (601, uniform and YAL002W). This highlights the difference between sequences which strongly position nucleosomes along their sequence and sequences with a more uniform location-affinity for forming nucleosomes. Finally, we exploit the ability of the RBP-model to explore sequence-space. We attempt to generate a sequence which favours a twist defect at any location in the nucleosome over the normal 147-bp nucleosome positioning.

[Page 6]

Chapter

Simulation set-up and theory We simulate the nucleosome on a string of DNA using a Monte-Carlo based simulation which we call the rigid base pair model (RBP). This algorithm has already proven to compute near-neighbour interactions in a DNA system in an efficient manner. [13] [1] [3] In earlier work the RBP model has already been thoroughly explained. [13] We expanded the basic working of this model.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2.1: a) Depiction of the rigid base pair model of a nucleosome. In red the DNA backbone connections with the histone octamer are indicated. Note that each plate is depicting paired nucleotides. b) Simulation scheme of a moving twist defect along a sequence. The darker shaded area represents the SHL where the twist defect is located, the light-shaded area is the SHL where the TD will move to. Lines between the consecutive SHLs represent sets of binding sites. A binding site is open in the case of a dotted binding site line. In step 1 a twist defect is present in the dark green shaded area and no binding sites are broken. In step 2 the adjacent binding site is broken, hereby letting the stretched DNA relax over two consecutive SHLs. In the final step the twist defect has moved by one SHL by reattachment of the binding site.

[Page 7]

Simulation set-up and theory

The RPB model

We model the DNA as a chain of rigid plates with each plate representing a base pair, see Figure 2.1a. The RBP model assumes only nearest neighbour interactions between base pairs. [1] In between two consecutive base pairs we define a mid-frame, through which we determine the relative orientation and location of the corresponding plates. In order to shape the rigid-plate double helix into a nucleosome, we constrain the position of 28 of such mid-frames to mimic the DNA backbone interaction with the histone-octamer. We divide the 28 binding sites into 14 sets of individual binding sites, with each set enclosing a minor groove along the DNA, hereby automatically taking the effect of the size of the minor groove into account. [13] The position of these binding sites is extracted from local minima in the crystallographic B-factor, obtained from X-ray experiments on nucleosomes. [8] The Hamiltonian of the DNA system is a quadratic energy interaction, E=

(q − q0 )T Q̂(q − q0 ).

(2.1)

Here q and q0 are six-component vectors containing 6 degrees of freedom (DOF) for the base pair interaction we define. These consist of 3 translational DOF – shift, slide and rise –, and 3 rotational DOF – twist, roll and tilt –. We define q to contain the sampled values of the DOF and q0 to contain the intrinsic values of the DOF for a given set of neighbouring base pairs. The 6 x 6 stiffness matrix is Q̂. The intrinsic values of the DOF and the stiffness are unique for every step of base pairs. Note that we have 4 x 4 possible types of neighbouring base pairs which reduce to 10 possible configurations due to symmetry arguments. [2] The unique values for the stiffness matrices and intrinsic vectors are derived from DNA crystals [14] and atom-scale simulations on DNA. [15] We adopt here the hybrid parameterization which combines both observational methods and has proven to be successful in earlier work using the RBP-model. [16] In the RBP-model we allow for two types of moves through phase-space, mutation moves or spatial (bp) moves. Mutation moves change the actual sequence of the DNA whereas spatial moves change the relative position and orientation of the dinucleotides. On top of these moves we can add or remove the binding sites by coupling or decoupling the DOF of two consecutive bound base pairs. The availability of these moves per base pair in the sequence can be freely initialised and therefore allow for a great variety of DNA systems we can investigate. We are able to convert the expected value of the Hamiltonian of a nu6

[Page 8]

2.2 Application of a twist defect

cleosome to Boltzmann probability factors. The RBP model employs the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to propagate through phase-space using the probability factors derived from this energy. [17] A sampled state is accepted with probability 1 if its energy is lower than the current state, or accepted with probability e− β∆E if a state with a larger energy is sampled. We allow for both mutation moves and conformational moves. Since both moves are employed in a single simulation, both are subject to the same temperature. On this base we should conceive the used temperature purely in a technical sense. [13]

Application of a twist defect

The RBP model allows us to apply a range of possible move-sets for every individual base pair. First we will only allow for ”bound moves” and ”bp moves”. At each base pair in our nucleosome only one of these moves is allowed. If a base pair is given a bp move, the plate representing the base pair is allowed to propagate through all the 6 DOF of phase-space, within the obvious limits of our set boundaries. In the case of bound moves, two adjacent base pairs are coupled in their DOF through their mid-frame, resulting in an effective 6 DOF per set of two bound bp. This automatically implies that bound moves have to be set for at least two neighbouring base pairs. We note that by opening a binding site, we simultaneously increase the DOF of our system. Hereby the ground-state energy is slightly overestimated in comparison with an all-closed binding site system. To overcome this we subtract the average energy contribution of the 6 DOF from our unfixed mid-frames from the obtained energy. Now that we are free to set up our nucleosome at will we have to find a way to mimic a twist defect. As stated earlier we determine the bound base pairs from local minima in the crystallographic B-factor in the NCP147 structure. [8] The 14 sets of 2 bound phosphates encapsulate so called super-helical locations (SHL). [4] It is in these regions that twist defects occur. In the case of an extra base pair in such a SHL we have a positive twist defect (undertwist) and in the case of a missing base pair we have a negative twist defect (overtwist). We note the we can simulate the propagation and existence of such twist defects by shifting binding sites by 1 bp with respect to the initial binding site locations derived from experiments. In order to do so we consecutively remove or add a base pair at a location which is exactly in the middle between two consecutive binding sites. Hereby we are not disturbing the initial orientations of the bound base pairs. In the case of the addition of a base pair, we append

[Page 9]

Simulation set-up and theory

the base pair such that the new mid-frame is derived from the orientation and position of its neighbour, one position ahead in the molecule. With the addition or removal of a base pair, an extra base pair is removed or appended at the beginning of the sequences respectively. Hence, there remain a constant 147 bp in our nucleosome. In this process we reload the initial sequence after initialising the mechanical constraints on our now torsional frustrated nucleosome. We assume a linear propagation through intermediate states in which a twist defect hops to a neighbouring SHL. The set of states through which the system will iterate is depicted in Figure 2.1b. We will denote this linear set of states as a state-chain. We assume that a twist defect comes in from the outside of the nucleosome by first opening the binding site at one of the termini of the nucleosome. This binding site reattaches on a location mismatched 1 bp with respect to the initial nucleosome configuration due to the removal or addition of a bp in its neighbouring SHL. We thus have alternating states of a stretched SHL and a stretched region of DNA where the torsional stress is distributed over two SHLs due to an open binding site. Note that opening these binding sites mimics the breaking of bonds between the DNA phosphate and the histone octamer. If this set of intermediate states is iterated over through the entire nucleosome, we have created a chain of states which mimics the diffusion of a twist defect through the entire nucleosome. We even can extend this chain of states over multiple nucleosomes. Note that this chain of states is symmetric in the way that a linear propagation through the chain of states can occur in both directions, each representing the process of nucleosome re-positioning by 1 bp.

Integration of the adsorption energy

We simulate every state in the state-chain separately, in order to obtain a proper energy landscape which depicts the diffusion of a twist defect. From our simulations we directly obtain the energy of the system at each point in phase-space of the MC-simulation. Auto-correlation analysis dictates that a Monte Carlo step-size of 222 steps is appropriate to rule out undesired correlations between simulation steps. As stated earlier we remove the average entropic contribution of the translational DOF by open binding sites. Next to that we add a energetic penalty if a binding site with the histone-protein is open.

[Page 10]

2.4 Implementation in the Markov Chain

This energetic penalty corresponds to the cost of opening a binding site. This parameter is rather hard to estimate. In an early attempt to find values for this binding site energy (Ebs ), or adsorption energy, binding site dependent values were derived from nucleosome unzipping experiments. By measuring dwell times, an estimate can be made for the adsorption energy per binding site. These values are given in Table 1 in the work by Fathizadeh et al. [2] In later work by de Bruin et al, these values were adopted as new data on force-induced unwrapping of nucleosomes was available. [3] Based on this new data, an extra offset of +1.87 k B T was found in addition to the binding site energies in earlier work. In even later work by Culkin et al, the data on which the previous values were based was found to be too noisy. Therefore the decision was made to approach the values Ebs to be constant for all binding sites. [1] The most recent value of the binding site energy, derived by van Deelen et al, provides a value of Ebs which is dependent on the salt concentration of the environment. [6] We do not take the salt concentration into account in our work. From the work provided by van Deelen et al we adopt a value Ebs = 5.8 which was found for physiological ionic conditions. This parameter has an enormous impact on the eventual quasi-diffusion constant we will derive for the movement of a nucleosome along an arbitrary sequence. Hence, we will discuss the effect of Ebs as a free parameter, ranging between 5.8k B T and 13.8k B T, with the latter value being the average adsorption energy obtained from the estimation made by Fatizadeh et al, with the addition of an extra offset of 1.87k B T, found in the work by de Bruin et al. In all cases we take a constant adsorption energy for every binding site. We will find that not all values of the binding site energy will result in physically valid observations, possibly due to limitations in the used model. It is for this reason that we adopt a constant value for Ebs = 13.7k B T in our main analysis which is the average value of the binding site dependent bindingenergy with the addition of the extra offset of +1.87 k B T.

Implementation in the Markov Chain

In order to find an expression for the diffusion coefficient from our free energy landscape we exploit the properties of an absorbing Markov Chain, analogous to earlier work about twist diffusion. [2] [18] From the found energy landscape of the twist defect propagation chain we calculate the Boltzmann transition probability factors. We denote the probability factor to make a transition to the next neighbouring state with r and the proba9

[Page 11]

Simulation set-up and theory

bility factor to move backwards in the state-chain with s. These relations are, e− βEi−1 e− βEi+1 (2.2) r = − βE , s = − βE . Due to the assumption that only neighbouring states in the state-chain can be accessed, we are able to calculate the relative probability of making the transition to an adjacent state. The relative probability to go to the next state in the chain of states is denoted with p whereas we denote the relative probability to move backwards in the state-chain by q. These relative probabilities are given by, p=

, r+s

q=

. r+s

(2.3)

We construct the n x n transition matrix T̂ from the probabilities found, with its size dependent on the number of states n generated in the simulations. The Markov Matrix for our particular chain of states is given by,   1 0 ...  q1 0 p1 ... 0     0 q2 p2 ... 0      .. . . . . . . T̂ =  . (2.4) . . . .    0 . . . q n −3  p n −3 0   0 ... q n −2 p n −2  An element T̂k,l represents the probability to make a transition from state k to state l. Note therefore that we assume by taking T̂0,0 = T̂n,n = 1 that once the twist defect has left the nucleosome, it stays there. We write the matrix in its canonical form and find the matrices Q̂ and R̂. Here Q̂ is the Markov Matrix with only the transient states indicated, congruous to stripping of the outer rows and columns of the matrix T̂. The matrix R̂ is a (n − 2) x 2 matrix with the two neighbouring states of the absorption states, q1 and pn−2 , indicated on the corresponding entry in the matrix analogous to T̂k,l where the rest of the entries are equal to zero. We exploit the properties of the Markov chain and find the fundamental matrix N̂ = (Î − Q̂)−1 . The matrix product N̂R̂ gives us the matrix B̂ which contains the probabilities of starting in transient state k and ending in absorption state l. Thus the element B̂0,1 gives us the end-to-end probability p∗ for entering the nucleosome in transient state 1 and ending in state n.

[Page 12]

2.5 From escape-probability to quasi diffusion constant

From escape-probability to quasi diffusion constant

An expression can be found for the diffusion constant of a single nucleosome step by combining an entrance rate k e for entering the state-chain and the probability of propagation through that entire set of states p∗ . [2] Kramer’s rate theory predicts that the entrance rate is given by the product of an attempt frequency ν0 and the probability of opening the first encountered binding site of the nucleosome, which costs Eb , leading to, k e = ν0 e−Eb /k B T .

(2.5)

We find an estimate for the attempt frequency ν0 by noting that the DNA has to make a fraction of corkscrew motion in order to enter the nucleosome. Therefore it experiences rotational friction. We approximate the DNA molecule as a cylinder and derive the rotational friction constant ζ = (2π/10)4πηR2 L. We use a factor (2π/10) since one full twist of DNA consists of ∼10 bp, therefore the factor represents a single bp rotational step. We choose η = 10−3 the viscosity of water, R = 9 Å the radius of our DNA cylinder and L = 34 Å, the length of the 10 bp long cylinder. This implies an attempt frequency of 1.6 · 1010 s−1 , based on earlier work by Kulic et al and Fathizadeh et al. [9] [2] From our simulations we derive the barrier height that the twist defect has to overcome in order to open the first encountered binding site. The diffusion coefficient for a single bp step of a nucleosome due to the propagation of a twist defect is given by, Dstep = k e,le f t p∗ + k e,right q∗ .

(2.6)

We denote the end-to-end probability for transitioning through the entire chain of states form left to right, from the first transient state to absorbing state n by p∗ . Also we denote the probability for a successful iteration through the reverse process, from the last transient state to absorbing state 0, by q∗ . Again this process is analogous to the work by Fathizadeh et al. [2]

[Page 13]

Chapter

Results In this work we will use the RBP-model to examine two subjects. First, we estimate the effective diffusion constant for different sequences due to the propagation of over- and undertwisted defects, using the TD-propagation scheme. We will look for differences between sequences in which the nucleosomes are strongly positioned in the sequence (601 and the yeast YAL002W sequence), and a sequence with exactly the opposite characteristic, the uniform sequence. Second, we will employ the mutation Monte Carlo (mMC)-scheme to include the sequence in the DOF of the system. We will attempt to generate a sequence with a twist defect in a certain SHL which has a lower energy in comparison to a full-bound nucleosome on a uniform sequence.

Nucleosome positioning along the sequence

We first determine the most probable position of the nucleosome on the considered sequences. In order to do so we pin a nucleosome on a DNA sequence and relax the system using the metropolis algorithm. We add no further twist defects and we do not mutate the sequence. We repeat the process along 20 consecutive bp of the three sequences in consideration. The corresponding sequences can be found in Appendix A.2. We note that the use of these sequences is arbitrary since there are no repetitive stretches of bp along the sequences. For example a stretch of 147 bp on a 601 sequence considered from starting position 2 is different from a set of consecutive 147 bp at a position much further along the 601 sequence, although both stretches might have a similar nucleosomepositioning affinity. Our main goal is to highlight the difference in nucle13

[Page 14]

Results

osome displacement on strong positioning sequences such as the 601 and YAL002W sequence, and a sequence with no clear nucleosome-position affinity at all, the uniform sequence. We find energetic minima in the nucleosome positioning landscape of all considered sequences and it is at these points that we will determine nucleosome diffusion constants. We are interested in such energetic minima along strong-positioning sequences since we hypothesise that at these locations nucleosome are not likely to re-position. All simulation are equilibriated for 104 steps after which we take 90 data points, evenly spread among 2 · 104 steps at a temperature of 103K. The average energy per simulation is plotted against the nucleosome position, the result is depicted in Figure 3.2d. The main difference we note is the strong positioning affinity for the 601 and YAL002W sequence with a ∼10 bp periodicity, in comparison to the uniform sequence. The intrinsic curvature of the DNA plays a role in the positioning of nucleosomes. The specially selected 601 sequence features flexible locations (AT-rich) altered with less flexible regions (GC-rich). If we position a nucleosome on exactly that position where we observe a flexible region and the minor groove is facing inwards into the nucleosome, the intrinsic curvature of the DNA supports the bending of the nucleosome. The alternation of AT-rich and GC-rich regions which aligns with the periodicity of the inward facing DNA minor groove enhances the ∼10 bp periodicity in the nucleosome positioning landscape. [4] [11] This behaviour is in line with observations on nucleosome positioning simulations for a uniform DNA sequence. The uniform sequence is a string of bp with identical physical properties which correspond to the average physical properties of the possible 16 dinucleotides. Therefore the sequence-dependent flexibility of this sequence does not resonate with the intrinsic bending of the DNA at any preferred location. From the nucleosome positioning landscape we are able to determine the preferred locations of nucleosomes along the DNA. It is at these positions where we will determine the single-step diffusion rate.

Estimation of the single-step diffusion constant

In chapter 2 we suggest a method to determine a diffusion constant for a process in which a nucleosome moves 1 bp in total due to the propagation of a twist defect. We find that the origin of the twist defect, being an overor undertwist defect, has a tremendous impact on the effective mobility

[Page 15]

3.2 Estimation of the single-step diffusion constant

of a nucleosome. We simulate a chain of states in which each binding site is consecutively reattached 1 bp shifted to its original location, for an effective movement of a nucleosome by 20 bp steps. In the simulations we equilibrate the system for 104 steps after which we take 90 data points, every 222 steps. Every simulation is performed at a temperature of 103K. The simulation-scheme is applied for movement due to an undertwist (+) defect and an overtwist (-) defect. We obtain an energy landscape for both chains of states to which we add the adsorption energy at states containing open binding sites. This process is repeated for the three sequences mentioned above, with a value of 13.7k B T adopted for constant binding site energy. The results are depicted in Figure 3.1. We observe that the cost of under-stretching the DNA is on average lower than the cost of over-stretching the DNA. This result enhances the peaking of the constant adsorption energy on the energy landscape with a larger magnitude in the understretched DNA case. Note that in both cases the binding site energy is constant and equal. The small energetic bumps that an overtwist defect has to cross in order to open a binding site explain the reason why we chose the largest estimate of Ebs in the simulations. Lower values for the adsorption energy would result in energetic minima at phases of the nucleosome where binding sites would be opened. Although nucleosomes have been observed with spontaneously opened termini, core-binding sites are less probable to open without the presence of ATP-dependent enzymes or off-equilibrium circumstances. [19] [20] From the energy landscapes obtained from the simulations on underand overstretched nucleosomes, we can determine an expression for the diffusion constant (Dstep ) for one step in total of the nucleosome. Using the Markov-method discussed in chapter 2 and determining the relative probabilities for states in the simulation to make a transition to adjacent states, we find values given in Table 3.1. We observe the enormous difference of roughly 7 orders of magnitude between the mobility of a nucleosome due to undertwisting of DNA in comparison with the nucleosome-mobility due to the propagation of overtwisted regions in the a nucleosome. We already observed the ∼5 k B T discrepancy between the average costs of introducing either twist defects into the nucleosome. This results seems to correlate with the step-diffusion of a nucleosome due to spontaneous formation of either twist defect. In our calculation two factors determine the main difference between the two cases. First, the attempt rate of introducing a twist defect, of either origin, into the nucleosome. This factor is solely determined by the difference in energy between the states at both termini on the nucleosomes. We find that this attempt rate is a factor 1.1 larger in the case of spontaneous introduction of an undertwist defect, with respect

[Page 16]

Energy landscape of a (-) twist defect

Energy landscape of a (+) twist defect

Energy + binding energy [KBT]

Energy + binding energy [KBT]

Results

<E> + EB 601 <E> + EB Uniform <E> + EB YAL002W

−7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1

0 1 SHL

(a) Negative (overtwist) defect

<E> + EB 601 <E> + EB Uniform <E> + EB YAL002W

−7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1

0 1 SHL

(b) Positive (undertwist) defect

Figure 3.1: Energy of nucleosome containing a twist defect plotted against the location (SHL) of the twist defect. At half-integer SHL values, the twist defect is located in between two SHLs, corresponding to a state with an opened binding site between the two SHLs. The 601 sequence process depicts a 1 bp sliding of a nucleosome between nucleosome positions 2 and 3, the uniform sequence between base pairs 10 and 11 and the YAL002W sequence between base pairs 19 and 20. Note that at the most half-integer SHL values the energy exceeds that of integer-valued SHL. This implies that at these locations the nucleosome prefers a torsionally frustrating twist defect over an open binding site. a) Single-bp nucleosome re-positioning energy landscape for three sequences due to the consecutive propagation of an overtwist (-) defect. A base pair is missing in the corresponding SHL. b) Single-bp nucleosome re-positioning energy landscape for three sequences due to the consecutive propagation of an undertwist (+) defect. An extra base pair is present in the corresponding SHL.

to the formation of an overtwist defect onto the 601 sequence. For the uniform sequence and the YAL002W sequence we find opposite results, with the ratio of introduction of an undertwist defect over the introduction of an overtwist defect being 0.44 and 0.47 respectively. However, the most decisive factor for the discrepancy between both diffusion processes is the difference in end-to-end probability of twist defect propagation. We find the ratio of the undertwist end-to-end probability versus overtwist end-to-end probability to be 1.4 · 106 on the 601 sequence, 4.9 · 106 for the uniform sequence and 6.2 · 106 on the YAL002W sequence. This reflects the observation that the energy of over-stretched −4 ≤ SHLs ≤ 4 is relatively high in comparison to analogous under-stretched regions. An overtwist defect is very unlikely to cross the core of the nucleosome, whereas this is relatively easy in the case of an undertwist defect.

[Page 17]

3.2 Estimation of the single-step diffusion constant

Fitted nucleosome positioning energy landscape

<E> [KBT]

<E> [KBT]

Fitted nucleosome positioning energy landscape

<E> 601 Fitted function

10.0 12.5 Nucleosome start bp

(a)

Nucleosome start bp

Nucleosome positioning energy landscape

<E> [KBT]

<E> [KBT]

(b) Fitted nucleosome positioning energy landscape

<E> YAL002W Fitted function

(c)

<E> Uniform Fitted function

10.0 12.5 Nucleosome start bp

<E> 601 <E> Uniform <E> YAL002W

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 Nucleosome start bp

(d)

Figure 3.2: a) Nucleosome-positioning energy landscape of a nucleosome on a 601 sequence at 20 adjacent base pairs. A sine function fit results in a barrier height of 6.4 ± 0.5 k B T. b) Nucleosome-positioning energy landscape of a nucleosome on a uniform sequence at 20 adjacent base pairs. A sine function fit results in a barrier height of 1.5 ± 0.4 k B T. c) Nucleosome-positioning energy landscape of a nucleosome on a yeast YAL002W at 20 adjacent base pairs. A sine function fit results in a barrier height of 6.7 ± 0.5 k B T. d) Nucleosome-positioning energy landscape of a nucleosome on a 601 sequence, a uniform sequence and a yeast (YAL002W) sequence. Note the theorised apparent 10 bp periodicity for both the YAL002W and 601 sequence. From this result we choose the minima for further analysis to be located at position 2 for the 601 sequence, 19 for the YAL002W sequence and at position 10 for the uniform sequence.

[Page 18]

Results

The effective diffusion of a nucleosome along the DNA

The quasi-diffusion constant we find for different nucleosome-systems making a 1 bp step (Dstep ) due to twist defects is only valid for its particular chain of states. Since the DNA sequences we use are not necessarily repetitive sections of base pairs, the energy-landscape as a function of nucleosome position is non-uniform. This nucleosome-positioning landscape however represents another ”zoomed-out” chain of states through which the nucleosome position changes. For the sequences we use, this energy landscape is given in Figure 3.2d, for 20 of such nucleosome steps. Note that between 2 consecutive steps in the nucleosome-positioning landscape, a corresponding intermediate 1-bp nucleosome-step landscape exists of which examples are given in Figure 3.1. We are able to find an estimate of the effective diffusion constant for a nucleosome sliding along a certain sequence. In earlier work, Kulic et al impose a formula which links the average barrier height A in the nucleosome-positioning energy landscape and Dstep to find the effective diffusion constant De f f of a nucleosome re-positioning along a sequence. [9] This relation is given by, De f f = Dstep I02 ( A/2).

(3.1)

Here I0 is the modified Bessel function of first kind. We are able to determine an average barrier height from our nucleosome-positioning energy landscape. We fit a sine function through the obtained data of the form y = a sin (2π/b( x − d)) + c. Here a represents half the average barrier height, b is the period of the function which we estimate to be 10, roughly the amount of bp in which the DNA makes one helical turn. The parameters b and c represent offset parameters. The simulated data with the corresponding fitted functions are given in Figure 3.2a to 3.2c. We note that for the uniform sequence, the amplitude of sinusoidal fit is of the same order of magnitude as the standard deviation in the energy measurements. In theory the barrier height of the uniform sequence would be equal to zero. We choose to adopt the amplitude obtained from the fitted sine function to give results which are in line with the other strongerpositioned sequences. The results are in line with the hypothesis that strong-positioning sequences are not likely to re-position since the minor groove will un-align with the AT-periodicity in the DNA. [7] This characteristic of stronger positioning

[Page 19]

3.3 The effective diffusion of a nucleosome along the DNA

sequences is echoed by the values obtained for the effective diffusion constant for the studied sequences. The results are given in Table 3.1. Note the relative high mobility of the uniform sequence along its sequence in comparison to the stronger positioning-sequences YAL002W and 601. The ∼6k B T high barriers in the studied high-affinity positioning sequences have an inhibiting effect on the mobility of nucleosomes. This is the case for both under- and overtwist defect-propagation of the nucleosomes.

−9 D− step 10 [ bp /s ] −2 D+ step 10 [ bp /s ] −10 [ bp2 /s ] D− e f f 10 −3 D+ e f f 10 [ bp /s ]

2.2 ±0.9 0.34 ±0.14

Uniform 9.3 ±0.1 1.4 ±0.2

YAL002W 0.15 ±0.06 0.12 ±0.05

Table 3.1: The combined results for the values found for the diffusion rate of a nucleosome for 1 step (Dstep ) and for the effective diffusion of nucleosomes along a sequence (De f f ). The error in the fitted amplitude of the nucleosome-positioning landscapes given in Figure 3.2a to 3.2c propagate in the result for De f f . Both results are given for the diffusion process due to propagation of spontaneously formed over- and undertwist defects.

[Page 20]

Results

Mutation Monte Carlo on a nucleosome containing a twist defect

We employ the metropolis Hastings algorithm to effectively explore sequence space. The goal is to find a sequence which intrinsically promotes the positioning of a mismatched nucleosome. We attempt to lower the energy of a nucleosome positioned on a uniform sequence with either an under- or overtwist defect located in SHL −6. We choose this SHL since this is a region consisting of a larger amount of bp, resulting in more effective DOF over which the system can relax. We perform a series of simulations in which we gradually decrease the temperature to imply increasingly stronger selection criteria on the available DOF. We start at a temperature of 273.15K and at any new iteration of in total 113 iterations we decrease the temperature with a factor 0.95. In each iteration we equilibrate the system for 2 · 104 steps after which we take 8 · 104 data points from a final run of 8 · 104 steps, performed at a temperature of 1.16K. The final run generates an ensemble of nucleosome states with different sequences, orientations and positions. In order to generate a sequence from the obtained data we take 266 equally separated samples from the original 8 · 104 samples. From this set of sampled states we determine the set of 4 adjacent bp (quadruple) with the highest occurrence at each position along the nucleosome from the entire ensemble. We look at high affinity quadruples since this takes any preference for adjacent bp at a nucleosome site in consideration. With the exception of the outer 3 base pairs along the 147 bp nucleosome, we have a set of 4 high-affinity nucleotides at each site along the sequence. This set is determined from the highestaffinity quadruples, denoted at 4 consecutive locations along the nucleosome. From this final set of 4 nucleotides per bp-location we select the most occurring nucleotide. This generates a 147-bp sequence which we run in a similar way to earlier simulations, described in section 3.1. The resulting energy landscapes are given in Figure 3.3. From Figure 3.3 we observe that the found sequences are not successful in attracting a twist defect on any position. On top of that the energy for the respective studied SHL is comparable to the energy of the 601 sequence. With this negative result we don’t rule out the existence of a sequence which promotes the presence of a twist defect, of either origin, in an SHL. The mMC-algorithm has successfully proven the ability in earlier work to relax a system by propagating through sequence space. [13] It is possible that the ensemble from which we attempt to determine a ground20

[Page 21]

3.4 Mutation Monte Carlo on a nucleosome containing a twist defect

Energy landscape of an undertwist defect

Energy landscape of an overtwist defect Energy + binding energy [KBT]

Energy + binding energy [KBT]

<E> + EB Mutated se uence <E> + EB 601

−7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1

(a) Undertwist defect

0 1 SHL

<E> + EB Mutated se uence <E> + EB 601

−7 −6 −5 −4 −3 −2 −1

0 1 SHL

(b) Overtwist defect

Figure 3.3: Energy as a function of twist defect position along a nucleosome for mutated sequences and the 601 sequence. At integer SHL values a TD is positioned between two adjacent binding sites. At half-integer SHL values a twist defect is positioned between two adjacent SHLs with an open binding site in between. For reference the energy landscape of a TD on the 601 sequence similar to Figure 3.1a (overtwist defect) or 3.1b (undertwist defect) is depicted. a) Energy landscape of a TD on a mutated sequence optimised with an extra bp in SHL -6 on the uniform sequence. b) Energy landscape of a TD on a mutated sequence optimised with a missing bp in SHL -6 on the uniform sequence.

state sequence consists of too many degenerate states. We conclude this from the fact that the high-affinity quadruples found at consecutive positions along the nucleosome rarely correlate with each other, although we do observe slight correlations in soft (AT-rich) regions and more rigid (GCrich) regions along the found quadruples. On average we find that the highest-affinity quadruples cover 1.8% of all generated quadruples of the considered samples in the ensemble on a given nucleosome site. Should there be no explicit preference for any quadruple we expect an occurrence ratio of 0.4% for any quadruple considering the existence of 256 possible quadruples. This implies that there is a preference for a certain quadruple, albeit not a major preference. An analysis which places twist defects on different SHLs and longer equilibration times could provide us with more uniform ensemble of sequences which promote the presence of a TD.

[Page 22]

Chapter

Discussion We find several similarities in our work compared to earlier experiments on under- and overstretched nucleosome regions. In crystal structures the positioning of overtwisted stretches of DNA concentrates around SHLs ±2 and ±5. This is in line with relative height of the energy at SHLs ±5 for all sequences. The results from our simulations on overtwisted DNA positioning at SHL ±2 are valid for mainly the YAL002W sequence. [12] [21] Also our results on undertwisted nucleosomes are in line with these findings. At SHLs ±2 and ±5, the nucleosome prefers overstretched DNA over understretched DNA and it at these locations that the energy is found to be relatively high in the simulations on undertwisted nucleosomes with respect to the energy of undertwist defects positioned elsewhere inside the nucleosome. [7] Also the suggested stability of undertwist twist defects around SHLs ±1 found in all-atom MD simulations by Brandani et al, are in line with the local minima found in the energy landscape of undertwist defect propagation through the considered sequences. [7] We observe that the energetic cost of positioning an overtwist defect somewhere in the nucleosome is in the order of ∼5 k B T higher than the cost of placing an undertwist twist defect in the nucleosome. This is a trend that also has been observed in earlier simulations on twist defect occupation inside nucleosomes. [7] Another characteristic peak in the energy landscape located at SHLs ±4 has been observed in earlier simulations on stretched nucleosomes, however not at strengths that we observe. [2] [7] This is possibly due to the fact that in our model these regions are the shortest SHLs. In our model the conformational stress that is applied to a SHL is able to relax mainly over all the 6 DOF per bp in the SHL. The short SHL allows for less degrees of freedom over which the system can effectively relax which leads to a high energy of the system.

[Page 23]

Discussion

Next to these similarities we find discrepancies, especially in the timescales on which diffusion events would occur. Brandani et al find overtwist defect induced single-bp sliding of nucleosomes to occur on the timescale of seconds, which is in line with the result by Fatizadeh et al and experimental results. [7] [2] We only approach these time-scales in the case of undertwist defect diffusion on a uniform sequence, which is considered to have the highest mobility of all considered systems. An overtwist defect would hardly re-position a nucleosome in our results. However, in theoretical work by Kulic et al, similar very large time-scale diffusion rates are found for twist defect driven effective diffusion rates of nucleosomes positioning on high anisotropic positioning-sequences. Although our model seems to be quite consistent in predicting relative energy difference between torsionally stressed states of the nucleosome with earlier MD simulations, our model has some major shortcomings. The first of these being the absence of interactions with both the histone-octamer and the possible solution around the nucleosome. The protein-core would hinder access of the nucleosome to certain orientations and locations, most notable in overtwisted SHLs. As as overtwist defect is present, the SHL is an effective 1 bp shorter, hereby applying tension on the DNA. Without the presence of a histone-core, the DNA would cut-short the intrinsic curvature of the nucleosome, hereby accessing the lowest possible energy state. Possible presence of a histone-core would hinder the DNA taking this shortcut and could potentially inhibit the occurrence of overtwist defects within the nucleosome. Other interactions between the nucleosome and its histone-core could affect the mobility and TD-occurrence of nucleosomes. Also interactions between the nucleosome and its environment could influence the results we perceive from our bare-nucleosome model. Since the ionic strength of the environment correlates with the adsorption energy, it is very probable that this has a consequence on nucleosome mobility. [6] An effect which would counter this hindrance of accessible locations of base pairs in the non-rigidity of the binding sites in our model. Taking the interaction between environment and nucleosome into account would have an influence on the rigidity of the binding sites, affecting the energy of defects in turn. As we find estimates for the mobility and effective mobility of nucleosomes along different sequences, we also immediately note that the values are not exact values. The methods used allow for rough estimates and mainly highlight the differences between over- and undertwist defectdriven sliding of nucleosomes along various sequences. A major decisive factor for determining an expression for the diffusion of nucleosomes is

[Page 24]

the adsorption energy. As discussed in chapter 2, there exists a debate about the actual strength of each binding site. In order to highlight the effect of the adsorption energy we derive the individual diffusion constants for all sequences originating from both stretching-mechanisms, as a function of adsorption energy. The results of these experiments are given in Figure 4.1 and depict a decrease in mobility which covers many orders of magnitude as it exponentially decays as a function of binding site energy. Again, the binding site energy has two main effects on the mobility of

Adsorption energy dependent diffusion coefficient

log(Dstep) [bp 2/s]

−4 −8 −12 −16 −20 −24 −28

TD Dstep 601 TD Dstep Uniform TD Dstep YAL002W

9.5 10.5 11.5 Adsorption e ergy [kBT]

Figure 4.1: The single-step diffusion constant derived for the three sequences as a function of adsorption energy. We indicate undertwist defect-driven diffusion with the ”+–” line and overtwist defect-driven diffusion with the ”o–” line. We use a log-scale on the y-scale and observe the exponentially declining behaviour of the single-step diffusion constant as a function of binding site energy. Although the obtained results for the propagation of an undertwist defect are deemed physically valid up from a minimal adsorption energy of 9 k B T, the minimal adsorption energy for the propagation of an overtwist defect is only physically valid from around the maximal value of 13.7 k B T.

nucleosomes. Both the entrance rate of a TD entering the nucleosomes and the end-to-end probability vary as a function of adsorption energy. As discussed earlier, we adopt the maximum value of Ebs since it avoids the existence of minima at open binding site states. Although some sites might exist where shallow minima are present, we rule out simulation results with constant value of Ebs < 9 for both propagation-mechanisms. We note that at the edges of the nucleosome, a lower value for the adsorption energy is allowed with respect to the centre SHLs. Further research on site-dependent adsorption energies could enhance the reliability of the outcome of the simulations.

[Page 25]

Discussion

Finally, further experimental research on twist defects inside nucleosomes might enhance the derivation proposed in chapter 2. In the adopted method for the derivation of a Dstep we only consider diffusion due to twist defects entering at the termini of the nucleosome. There is a non-zero probability that a near-end binding site opens and reattaches in a mismatched fashion. The situation exists that the twist defect propagates to the opposite end, albeit with a small probability. The adoption of such a feature is easily integrable in the mathematical method, only attempt frequencies of such events are unknown. As discussed in the results in chapter 5, we did not succeed in finding a sequence which prefers the presence of any twist defect in SHL −6. One possible reason for this is the lack of equilibration time we adopt in our simulations. In Figure A.3 in the Appendix we performed an analysis on the correlation of the energy in the mutation-simulations as a function of sample step-size. We note larger equilibration-lengths compared to nomutation simulations at much higher temperatures in Figure A.1a and Figure A.1b. In order to obtain the same amount of feasible data points compared to the no-mutation simulations (Figures 3.1 and 3.2), we need much larger run times and equilibration times. We recommend re-performing the mutation-simulations on machines with more computing power in order to obtain a more elaborate data set from which at least 90 feasible data points can be obtained in order to find suitable TD-governing DNA sequences.

[Page 26]

Chapter

Conclusion From our simulations we find the energy landscape of a twist defect positioned at consecutive SHLs or in between SHLs in case a binding site between the histone-octamer and the DNA-backbone is open. We employ a method introduced by Fathizadeh et al which is based on absorbingMarkov Matrix analytics to determine a single-bp-step rate of diffusion for each sequence. [2] We find similarities between our model and the all-atom MD models in the positioning of twist defects within the nucleosome. We observe a relatively low energy for overtwist defects to position at SHLs ±5 and ±2, we also note that this is the opposite case for undertwist defects located at identical SHLs. Also the peaks in energy we observe for the positioning of an overtwist defect in SHL ±4 are in line with previous MD simulations by Brandani et al and Fathizadeh at al, however we observe these peaks with a larger magnitude. [7] [2] Finally from our results we conclude that on average the cost of placing an undertwist defect is lower in comparison to the introduction of an overtwist defect, this phenomenon has already been proposed and observed by Brandani et al. We observe the existence of stable undertwist twist defects in a nucleosome. Although our model has matching results with all-atom MD simulations and observations in crystal structures, we do not obtain such results for the effective and one-step diffusion rates. According to our results, in the highest-mobility case, the effective-diffusion of an undertwist defect along a uniform sequence displaces a nucleosome by a single step on the one hour timescale. In previous work on MD-simulations the estimate for single-step overtwist defect diffusion along various uniform sequences was in the order smaller than one second. [2] [7] We impose two improvements on the RPB-model to potentially give more

[Page 27]

Conclusion

insight in the mismatch in results. The first is the introduction of interactions with the histone-octamer core and the surroundings. The presence of the histone core and ion-containing environment could introduce many interactions, both sterically hindering the DNA as well as introducing more dynamic and realistic adsorption energies for opening binding sites. Second, the introduction of not only twist defects at both termini, leading directly to a diffusion step of the nucleosome, are responsible for nucleosome displacement. Taking into account multiple twist defects, both positive and negative, at multiple regions along the nucleosome could eventually induce a step of a nucleosome. More insight on the introduction rates on these ”deeper” twist defects could enhance the likelihood of repositioning the nucleosome. We conclude that the RPB-model is reasonably in-line with previous observations on stretched nucleosomes. The model is suited for studying non-dynamic cases of twist defects along nucleosomes and hereby the great advantage of the RPB-model can be exploited by exploring sequencespace for torsionally frustrated nucleosomes. We have not yet succeeded in finding appropriate sequences which promote the presence of any twist defect. However, we do not rule out the existence of such sequences and the ability of our model to find such a sequence. When the dynamics of sliding nucleosomes is studied, further improvement of the RBP-model is advised given the inconsistent results with MD-simulations considering diffusion-rates. Stationary states of twist defect containing nucleosomes can successfully be studied using the RBP-model.

[Page 28]

Bibliography

[1] Jamie Culkin et al. “The role of DNA sequence in nucleosome breathing”. In: European Physical Journal E 40.11 (2017). ISSN: 1292895X. [2] Arman Fathizadeh et al. “Rigid-body molecular dynamics of DNA inside a nucleosome”. eng. In: The European Physical Journal E 36.3 (2013), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 1292-8941. [3] Lennart de Bruin et al. “Why Do Nucleosomes Unwrap Asymmetrically?” In: The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 120.26 (2016), pp. 5855– [4] Giovanni B Brandani et al. “DNA sliding in nucleosomes via twist defect propagation revealed by molecular simulations”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 46.6 (Feb. 2018), pp. 2788–2801. ISSN: 0305-1048. [5] David Winogradoff and Aleksei Aksimentiev. “The Molecular Mechanism of Nucleosome Breathing”. In: Biophysical Journal 112.3, Supplement 1 (2017), 371a. ISSN: 0006-3495. [6] Koen van Deelen, Helmut Schiessel, and Lennart de Bruin. “Ensembles of Breathing Nucleosomes: A Computational Study”. In: Biophysical Journal 118.9 (2020), pp. 2297–2308. ISSN: 0006-3495. [7] Giovanni B Brandani et al. “DNA sliding in nucleosomes via twist defect propagation revealed by molecular simulations.” eng. In: Nucleic acids research 46.6 (2018), pp. 2788–2801. ISSN: 03051048. [8] Curt A Davey et al. “Solvent Mediated Interactions in the Structure of the Nucleosome Core Particle at 1.9 Å Resolution.” In: Journal of Molecular Biology 319.5 (2002), pp. 1097–1113. ISSN: 0022-2836. [9] I M Kulic and H Schiessel. “Chromatin dynamics: nucleosomes go mobile through twist defects.” eng. In: Physical review letters 91.14 (2003), pp. 148103–148103. ISSN: 0031-9007.

[Page 29]

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[10] J Lequieu, DC Schwartz, and Jj de Pablo. “In silico evidence for sequence-dependent nucleosome sliding”. English. In: Proceedings Of The National Academy Of Sciences Of The United States Of Ame 114.44 (2017), E9197–E9205. ISSN: 0027-8424. [11] Eran Segal et al. “A genomic code for nucleosome positioning”. In: Nature 442.7104 (2006), pp. 772–778. ISSN: 1476-4687. [12] Dileep Vasudevan, Eugene Y D Chua, and Curt A Davey. “Crystal Structures of Nucleosome Core Particles Containing the 601 Strong Positioning Sequence”. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 403.1 (2010), pp. 1–10. ISSN: 0022-2836. [13] B Eslami-Mossallam et al. “Multiplexing genetic and nucleosome positioning codes: A computational approach”. In: 11 (2016). [14] W K Olson et al. “DNA sequence-dependent deformability deduced from protein-DNA crystal complexes.” eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 95.19 (1998), pp. 11163–11168. ISSN: 0027-8424. [15] Filip Lankas et al. “DNA Basepair Step Deformability Inferred from Molecular Dynamics Simulations”. eng. In: Biophysical Journal 85.5 (2003), pp. 2872–2883. ISSN: 0006-3495. [16] Nils B Becker, Lars Wolff, and Ralf Everaers. “Indirect readout: detection of optimized subsequences and calculation of relative binding affinities using different DNA elastic potentials”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 34.19 (Oct. 2006), pp. 5638–5649. ISSN: 0305-1048. [17] Siddhartha Chib and Edward Greenberg. “Understanding the MetropolisHastings Algorithm”. In: The American Statistician 49.4 (Nov. 1995), pp. 327–335. ISSN: 0003-1305. DOI: 10.1080/00031305.1995.10476177. [18] Charles Miller Grinstead and James Laurie Snell. Introduction to probability. American Mathematical Soc., 2012. [19] Gu Li and Jonathan Widom. “Nucleosomes facilitate their own invasion”. In: Nature Structural Molecular Biology 11.8 (2004), p. 763. ISSN: 1545-9993. [20] W.J.A Koopmans et al. “spFRET Using Alternating Excitation and FCS Reveals Progressive DNA Unwrapping in Nucleosomes”. eng. In: Biophysical Journal 97.1 (2009), pp. 195–204. ISSN: 0006-3495. [21] Y Tsunaka et al. “Alteration of the nucleosomal DNA path in the crystal structure of a human nucleosome core particle”. English. In: Nucleic Acids Research 33.10 (2005), pp. 3424–3434. ISSN: 0305-1048.

[Page 30]

Appendix

Appendix A.1

Auto-correlation analysis

Correlation of dk spaced steps for - TD simulations.

<E(k), E(k + dk)> BS open <E(k), E(k + dk)> BS closed

<E(k), E(k + dk)>

<E(k), E(k + dk)>

Correlation of dk spaced steps for + TD simulations. −0.1

(a) Positive twist-defect

dk

−0.1

<E(k), E(k + dk)> BS open <E(k), E(k + dk)> BS closed

dk

(b) Negative twist-defect

Figure A.1: Correlation data for the simulations on nucleosome positioning and twistdefect-carrying nucleosomes at a temperature of 103K with no sequence mutation. We take the twist defect to be present in SHL +2. For both TD origins, the correlation of the energy has been observed for a system where the neighbouring binding site is open and where it is closed. We observe that after ∼222 steps, auto-correlations vanish. Therefore we take for every simulation where no sequence mutation is present a equilibration time of 104 steps and a run time of 2 · 104 steps where we take in total 90 data points, each separated by 222 steps. a) Correlation of energy for a positive twist defect located at SHL +2. b) Correlation of energy for a negative twist defect located at SHL +2.

[Page 31]

Appendix

Sequence-correlation for mutation simulations

Sequence-correlation [%]

Percentage shared bp - TD Percentage shared bp + TD

40 50 60 70 Data point seperation

<E(k), E(k + dk)>

Figure A.2: Sequence-correlation for all bp with the sequence taken at the first data point of a 8 · 104 run with 8 · 104 data points taken at a temperature of 1.16K. For both cases, an undertwist defect at SHL -6 and an overtwist defect at SHL -6, the system has equilibriated for 2 · 104 steps in 113 simulations in which the temperature was consecutively decreased with a factor 0.95. For each consecutive data point we compare the bp at position i with the bp at position i of the initial sequence. The percentage of corresponding bp with respect to the initial 147 bp considered in the simulation is plotted against the separation of the data points.

−0.1

Correlation of dk spaced steps for mutation simulations. <E(k), E(k + dk)> - TD <E(k), E(k + dk)> + TD

dk

Figure A.3: Energy correlation of a sequence-mutation, 8 · 104 run with 8 · 104 data points taken at a temperature of 1.16K. For both cases, an undertwist defect at SHL -6 and an undertwist defect at SHL -6, the system has equilibriated for 2 · 104 steps in 113 simulations in which the temperature was consecutively decreased with a factor 0.95. We observe the much larger equilibration length compared to the results in Figure A.1a and Figure A.1b.

[Page 32]

A.2 Used DNA-sequences

A.2

Used DNA-sequences

All of the sequences are 147 bp long. For the simulations on nucleosome positioning, 20 bp extra are needed for the 601, Uniform and YAL00W2 sequence. Uniform: 167 ”X” base pairs. 601: CCT GGA GAA TCC CGG TGC CGA GGC CGC TCA ATT GGT CGT AGA CAG CTC TAG CAC CGC TTA AAC GCA CGT ACG CGC TGT CCC CCG CGT TTT AAC CGC CAA GGG GAT TAC TCC CTA GTC TCC AGG CAC GTG TCA GAT ATA TAC ATC CTG TGC ATG TAT TGA ACA GCG AC YAL00W2: ATG GAG CAA AAT GGC CTT GAC CAC GAC AGC AGA TCT AGC ATC GAT ACG ACT ATT AAT GAC ACT CAA AAG ACT TTC CTA GAA TTT AGA TCG TAT ACC CAA TTA AGT GAA AAA CTG GCA TCT AGT TCT TCA TAT ACG GCA CCT CCC CTG AAC GAA GAT GGT CCT AAA GG Mutated undertwist sequence: CCA ACT TCG CGT TTT CAC TCT CAC GAT TAG GAG AGT CGG CAG CAG TCG CGC CGT TAT CGA TAT TCA CTT AAG TGA GCC ACA GCA GAG GGG GAG TCA ATC CTC TGA CAT TTT TCC GCA TGT ATA GGA ACA TTT AGG TCC CGA AAG GTC Mutated overtwist sequence: CAT CTT GCT CTT GTT GTT ATC CTA ATT CCG GAC CGG CCG CCC TGC GCG GAT AGC TCC CCT AAC CGG ACG ATT TGA ACG TAC GAC AGA ACC GCA AAT AGC GCA TTG AGT TCG CGC CGC GGG ATG CCA CGG GCG CGA CGG AGG TTA GCA

A.3

Error analysis

With the calculation of De f f , we have to take into account the error that we find in the fitting of the parameter A. This parameter we find from fitted functions to the nucleosome positioning landscape in Figure 3.2d. We start

[Page 33]

Appendix

with Equation 3.1 and write its definition,

−2 A De f f = Dstep I0 ∞

= Dstep

∑ m!Γ(m + 1) m =0

(A.1)

2m !−2 .

To find the uncertainty in De f f as a function of ∂A we need the derivative ∂De f f /∂A. We find the following expression, ∂De f f ∂I0 ∂De f f = ∂A ∂I0 ∂A

= −2Dstep I0−3 Dstep =−

∞

∂I0 ∂A

∑ (m!)2 m =0

(A.2)

2m

! −3

∞

2m ∑ (m!)2 m =0

2m−1

!

Here we used the relation Γ(m + 1) = m!. We note that both summations converge for large values of m. Taking this limit (mmax = 10) allows us to find the error in De f f as a function of the uncertainty in the barrier height A. ∂Dstep ∂De f f = ∂A. (A.3) ∂A

A.4

Used equipment

We employed a virtual machine on Google Cloud services and used a single Intel Skylake 3.75GB vCPU equiped with Ubuntu 18.04.4 LTS.
