[Page 1]

is it possible to extend this theory to understand the formation of non-equilibrium p53 aggregates? it looks similar to the theory by Lubchenko and Vekilov

Effects of macromolecular crowding on protein folding and aggregation studied by density functional theory: Dynamics Akira R. Kinjo1,* and Shoji Takada1,2,вҖ 

PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan е…ұReceived 21 March 2002; revised manuscript received 28 August 2002; published 7 November 2002е…І Inside the living cell is inherently crowded with proteins and other macromolecules. Thus, it is indispensable to take into account various interactions between the protein and other macromolecules for thorough understanding of protein functions in cellular contexts. Here we focus on the excluded volume interaction imposed on the protein by surrounding macromolecules or вҖҳвҖҳcrowding agents.вҖҷвҖҷ We have presented a theoretical framework for describing equilibrium properties of proteins in crowded solutions е…іA. R. Kinjo and S. Takada, Phys. Rev. E е…ұto be publishedе…Іе…ҙ. In the present paper, we extend the theory to describe nonequilibrium properties of proteins in crowded solutions. Dynamics simulations exhibit qualitatively different morphologies depending on the aggregating conditions, and it was found that macromolecular crowding accelerates the onset of aggregation while stabilizing the native protein in the quasiuniform phase before the onset of aggregation. It is also observed, however, that the aggregation may be kinetically inhibited in highly crowded conditions. The effects of crowding on folding and unfolding of proteins are also examined, and the results suggest that fast folding is an important factor in preventing aggregation of denatured proteins. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.66.051902

PACS numberе…ұsе…І: 87.15.Nn, 87.15.Aa

I. INTRODUCTION

theories can describe the kinetics of aggregation semiquantitatively or even quantitatively, they predefine the structure of aggregates and only the growth rate of aggregates can be tracked. Recently, molecular simulation studies on the competition between protein folding and aggregation have also been performed е…і10вҖ“12е…ҙ. Molecular simulations have advantages in that they can provide detailed pictures of protein conformational changes upon folding and/or aggregation. However, the number of proteins and other macromolecules that can be handled in a simulation is limited, whereas aggregation typically involves quite a large number of molecules. To complement simple kinetic theories and detailed molecular simulations, there is a need for another theoretical framework that can track the morphological evolution as well as the growth rate of aggregates consisting of a large number of proteins. In our previous paper е…і13е…ҙ, we presented a density functional theory that describes a system of proteins and crowding agents at equilibrium, and showed that crowding effects on protein stability and aggregation can be treated in a unified framework. Two main results obtained there are that, as the bulk density of the crowding agent increases, aggregation of denatured proteins is enhanced and the native protein is increasingly stabilized unless aggregation occurs е…і13е…ҙ. Here we extend the theory to treat nonequilibrium phenomena such as aggregation dynamics. The method used here is based on a dynamic density functional theory е…і14е…ҙ which is widely used in simulations of phase separation dynamics of, for example, polymer melts е…і15,16е…ҙ. With this extension, it has become possible to see dynamic aspects of crowding effects on protein stability, folding, and aggregation in a unified framework. The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we briefly summarize the free energy density functional presented previously е…і13е…ҙ, and then formulate a set of equations that describe the dynamics of the density fields of the protein and

Unlike in typical biochemical experiments in which the proteins of interest are purified and diluted, the living cell is inherently crowded with a wide variety of other proteins and macromolecules which generally occupy 20вҖ“30 % of the total cell volume е…і1е…ҙ. It is natural to expect that miscellaneous interactions present in such crowded conditions may alter physical, biochemical, and even physiological properties of the protein of interest е…і2е…ҙ. Among all the complex interactions between proteins and macromolecules, the excluded volume effect is of prominent importance because it is always present as long as molecules exist. The effects imposed by the excluded volume of macromolecules are called вҖҳвҖҳmacromolecular crowdingвҖҷвҖҷ effects е…і2вҖ“ 6е…ҙ and those macromolecules that impose such effects are termed вҖҳвҖҳcrowding agentsвҖҷвҖҷ е…і5е…ҙ. Among a wide variety of phenomena affected by macromolecular crowding, we focus on crowding effects on protein stability, folding, and aggregation in this paper. Not only static properties but also dynamic aspects of macromolecular crowding and aggregation are also of much interest because formation of aggregates such as inclusion bodies and amyloid fibrils is always a dynamical process. Recently, it has been suggested that transient aggregates during amyloid fibril formation may be inherently toxic to the cell, regardless of whether or not the final amyloid fibrils are toxic е…і7е…ҙ. The experimental measurement of the crowding effect on the rate of amyloid formation is also reported, indicating that crowding accelerates amyloid formation е…і8е…ҙ. There are also theoretical studies of aggregation kinetics under the influence of crowding agents е…і8,9е…ҙ. Although some *Electronic address: akinjo@theory.chem.sci.kobe-u.ac.jp вҖ 

Electronic address: stakada@kobe-u.ac.jp

1063-651X/2002/66е…ұ5е…І/051902е…ұ10е…І/$20.00

66 051902-1

В©2002 The American Physical Society

[Page 2]

crowding agent. The results of dynamics simulations are presented in Sec. III, showing morphological variations of transient aggregates and crowding effects on aggregation as well as on folding and unfolding. Section IV tries to relate the simulation results with the crowding effects in the cell and some experimental observations. The conclusion is given in Sec. V.

A. Density functional

The free energy density functional that describes the system of proteins and crowding agents was introduced in our preceding paper е…і13е…ҙ. We briefly review it here. First, the system we consider consists of two chemical species: one protein species е…ұdenoted by P) and one crowding agent species (C). But the protein can be either native е…ұNе…І or denatured (D). Therefore, there are actually three physical species: N, D, and C. Each of the three species is characterized by an intrinsic free energy вҗ© вҗЈ ( вҗЈ в«ҪN,D,C). Next, we assume the following bare interaction potential (u вҗЈ , вҗӨ ; вҗЈ , вҗӨ в«ҪN,D,C) between two molecules: u вҗЈ,вҗӨе…ұ r е…І в«Ҫ

е…ұ rвӯҗR вҗЈ в«№R вҗӨ е…І ,

в‘Җ вҗЈ,вҗӨ

е…і R вҗЈ в«№R вҗӨ в¬Қrвӯҗ3 е…ұ R вҗЈ в«№R вҗӨ е…Іе…ҙ ,

е…і rв¬Һ3 е…ұ R вҗЈ в«№R вҗӨ е…Іе…ҙ ,

е…ұ1е…І

е…ұ3е…І

вҗЈ

вҗЈ

вҗЈ

в«№T вҗҫ вҗЈ ln вҗҫ вҗЈ е…¶ в«№T вҗҫ S ln вҗҫ S , е…ұ4е…І

and F n is the nonideal part, F n е…і е…ө вҗҫ вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І е…¶ е…ҙ в«Ҫ

еҶ• е…ә

вҗЈ,вҗӨ

V вҗЈ,вҗӨв«Ҫ

4d

е…ұ7е…І

dsе…© sе…© 2 u вҗЈeff, вҗӨ е…ұ е…© sе…© е…І ,

вҗҰF вҗҰ вҗҫ вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І

вҗҫ вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І вҗі 0в«ә

е…ә вҗҫ вҗӨ е…ұ rе…І вҗӨ

в«№W вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І ,

е…ұ8е…І

where the last term W вҗЈ (r)в¬…(U вҗЈ , вҗӨ в«№V вҗЈ , вҗӨ вөң 2 ) вҗҫ вҗӨ (r) may be regarded as the potential of mean force for the species вҗЈ .

The dynamics of the system consists of two different processes: diffusion and folding-unfolding reactions. Therefore, we assume that the following diffusion-reaction equations describe the dynamics of the system:

віө вҗҫ N е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫв«әвөңвҖўJN е…ұ rе…І в«әk u е…ұ rе…І вҗҫ N е…ұ rе…І в«№k f е…ұ rе…І вҗҫ D е…ұ rе…І , е…ұ9aе…І віөt віө вҗҫ D е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫв«әвөңвҖўJD е…ұ rе…І в«№k u е…ұ rе…І вҗҫ N е…ұ rе…І в«әk f е…ұ rе…І вҗҫ D е…ұ rе…І , е…ұ9bе…І віөt віө вҗҫ C е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫв«әвөңвҖўJC е…ұ rе…І , віөt

е…і U вҗЈ , вҗӨ вҗҫ вҗЈ вҗҫ вҗӨ в«әV вҗЈ , вҗӨ вҖң вҗҫ вҗЈ вҖўвҖң вҗҫ вҗӨ е…ҙ .

е…ұ5е…І

е…ұ9cе…І

where JвҗЈ (r) is the flux of the species вҗЈ , and k u (r) and k f (r) are site-dependent unfolding and folding transition rates, respectively. Equations е…ұ9е…І are essentially the equations of continuity for the conserved variables вҗҫ N (r)в«№ вҗҫ D (r) and вҗҫ C (r). The functional form of the flux JвҗЈ is derived heuristically from FickвҖҷs law. According to FickвҖҷs law, the flux in an ideal е…ұdiluteе…І solution is given by JвҗЈ е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫв«әD вҗЈ вөң вҗҫ вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І ,

еҶ• еҶӢ е…ә е…өвҗ© вҗҫ

е…ұ6е…І

в«Ҫ вҗ© вҗЈ в«№T ln

where F i is the ideal part, F i е…і е…ө вҗҫ вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І е…¶ е…ҙ в«Ҫ

dsu вҗЈeff, вҗӨ е…ұ е…© sе…© е…І ,

вҗ® вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫ

е…ұ2е…І

Throughout this paper, we always set в‘Җ вҗЈ , вҗӨ в«Ҫ0 for all вҗЈ , вҗӨ в«ҪN,D,C except for в‘Җ D,D . Since denatured proteins are, in general, prone to attract each other due to exposed hydrophobic side chains and hydrogen-bonding groups, в‘Җ D,D is set to some negative value. The system is represented by the density fields of the native protein, denatured protein, and the crowding agent: вҗҫ N (r), вҗҫ D (r), and вҗҫ C (r), respectively. The solvent density вҗҫ S (r) is indirectly defined by вҗҫ S в«Ҫ вҗі 0 в«ә е…ә вҗЈ вҗҫ вҗЈ where the summation is over вҗЈ в«ҪN,D, and C, and вҗі 0 is the total bulk density of the system. Assuming that the effective interaction u вҗЈeff, вҗӨ is short ranged, the free energy functional is given by F е…і е…ө вҗҫ вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І е…¶ е…ҙ в«ҪF i в«№F n ,

B. Dynamics

from which the effective interaction potential u вҗЈeff, вҗӨ is defined as е…і17е…ҙ u вҗЈeff, вҗӨ е…ұ е…© rе…© е…І в«ҪT е…ұ 1в«әe в«әu вҗЈ , вҗӨ ( е…© rе…© )/T е…І .

U вҗЈ,вҗӨв«Ҫ

where d is the spatial dimension е…ұi.e., dв«Ҫ3). The local chemical potential вҗ® вҗЈ (r) is defined as a functional derivative of the free energy F with respect to вҗҫ вҗЈ (r),

II. THEORY AND MODELING

в¬Ғ

Here we have defined a set of interaction parameters,

е…ұ10е…І

where D вҗЈ is a diffusion constant. The crowded solution is not ideal, however, and macromolecular interactions cannot be neglected. Therefore we replace the density вҗҫ вҗЈ (r) on the right-hand side of Eq. е…ұ10е…І with the effective density or thermodynamic activity a вҗЈ (r)в¬…expе…івҗ®вҗЈ(r)/T е…ҙ . Furthermore, since the diffusion at a site will be influenced by the crowdedness of the site е…ұthe more crowded the site, the slower the diffusion thereе…І, we require that the flux is also proportional to the square of the vacancy е…ұor solvent densityе…І of the site, вҗҫ S (r). Finally, the flux term becomes

I believe this is not correct, the flux here should be the gradient of the chemical potential (not its exponential), and in fact even the FickвҖҷs law can be derived from that

[Page 3]

JвҗЈ е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫв«әD вҗЈ е…ө вҗҫ S е…ұ rе…І е…¶ 2 вөңa вҗЈ е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫв«әD вҗЈ е…ө вҗҫ S е…ұ rе…І е…¶ 2 вөңe вҗ® вҗЈ (r)/T . е…ұ11е…І вҗЈ

In the limit of infinite dilution ( вҗҫ вҶ’0 for all вҗЈ в«ҪN,D,C), Eq. е…ұ11е…І reduces to the ordinary FickвҖҷs law, Eq. е…ұ10е…І. The transition rates of folding and unfolding vary over sites due to stabilization or destabilization by interactions with nearby molecules. Therefore it is necessary to define site-dependent folding and unfolding transition rates. First we assume a two-state kinetics of folding and unfolding and introduce the intrinsic free energy of the transition state, вҗ© TS . According to the transition state theory, the unfolding and folding rate constants (k 0u and k 0f , respectivelyе…І in a dilute protein solution are given by k 0u в«Ҫ вҗҜ 0 expе…і в«ә е…ұ вҗ© TS в«ә вҗ© N е…І /T е…ҙ ,

е…ұ12е…І

k 0f в«Ҫ вҗҜ 0 expе…і в«ә е…ұ вҗ© TS в«ә вҗ© D е…І /T е…ҙ ,

е…ұ13е…І

where вҗҜ 0 is the attempt frequency. When interactions between molecules cannot be neglected, the rate constants become site dependent. We assume that the potential of the mean force, W TS (r), for the transition state protein is a linear combination of those for the native and denatured proteins: W TS е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫ вҗ» W N е…ұ rе…І в«№ е…ұ 1в«ә вҗ» е…І W D е…ұ rе…І ,

е…ұ14е…І

where вҗ» иӢё е…і 0,1е…ҙ is a weight constant. Experimental values of TanfordвҖҷs вҗӨ T е…і18е…ҙ suggest that вҗ» в«Ҫ0.8 is a reasonable value which we always use in the following. The site-dependent unfolding and folding rate constants е…і k u (r) and k f (r), respectivelyе…ҙ are given by k u е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫk 0u expе…і в«ә е…ө W TS е…ұ rе…І в«әW N е…ұ rе…І е…¶ /T е…ҙ ,

е…ұ15е…І

k f е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫk 0f expе…і в«ә е…ө W TS е…ұ rе…І в«әW D е…ұ rе…І е…¶ /T е…ҙ .

е…ұ16е…І

The reaction terms in Eq. е…ұ9aе…І can be rearranged as

віө вҗҫ N е…ұ rе…І в«Ҫв«әk u е…ұ rе…І вҗҫ N е…ұ rе…І в«№k f е…ұ rе…І вҗҫ D е…ұ rе…І віөt reaction

C. Numerics 1. Physical scales

We describe the physical scales of the system treated, although they have been described in the previous paper е…і13е…ҙ. The unit of energy is defined as the folding temperature in dilute solution, which is в¬ғ3 kJ/mol. In all the simulations below, we set Tв«Ҫ1; hence вҗ© N в«Ҫ вҗ© D holds. For simplicity, we set вҗ© N в«Ҫ вҗ© D в«Ҫ0. The intrinsic free energy of the crowding agent does not play any role in the present model; hence we set вҗ© C в«Ҫ0. These values are always used below. The intrinsic free energy of the transition state protein is set as вҗ© TS в«Ҫ1 or вҗ© TS в«Ҫ5. The former value corresponds to fast-folding proteins and is used in most of the calculations, while the latter value represents proteins which fold е…ұand unfoldе…І more slowly. The unit length is taken as approximately 10 nm, so that the radii of the molecules are в¬ғ0.1 unit length. The experimentally measured radius of gyration of the native state of the IgG binding domain of streptococcal protein L е…ұ62 amino acid residuesе…І is 1.65 nm and that of the denatured state е…ұdenatured by GdmClе…І is в¬ғ2.6 nm е…і18е…ҙ. Hence R D в¬ғ1.5R N . In all the calculations below, we set the radius of the native protein to 0.4 unit length and that of the denatured one to 0.6. In order to keep the volume fraction of the denatured protein in a unit volume less than unity, we set вҗі 0 в«Ҫ1. In the following numerical simulations, the linear system size is set to 64 unit length. 2. Discretization scheme

The set of partial differential equations, Eq. е…ұ9е…І, are discretized by the line method so that the spatial dimension of the system is composed of 32в«»32в«»32 lattice sites with the lattice constant hв«Ҫ64/32в«Ҫ2. The periodic boundary condition is always imposed in all directions. The diffusion terms in Eq. е…ұ9е…І are discretized by applying central finite differencing twice. Setting rв«Ҫ(x,y,z), the discretization in the x direction reads

віө віө е…і вҗҫ S е…ұ rе…Іе…ҙ 2 e вҗ® вҗЈ (r)/T віөx віөx

в«Ҫ вҗҜ 0 вҗҫ S е…ұ rе…І e в«ә е…ө вҗ© TS в«№W TS (r) е…¶ /T

derivation? folding depends (as it should) on interactions with neighbors through mu_N and mu_D, but unclear where this dependence originated, since it was not present in equations 12-16

в«»е…ұ e

вҗ® D (r)/T

в«әe

вҗ® N (r)/T

вҶ’

е…ұ17е…І

е…І.

е…ә еҶ• drвҗҰ вҗҫ вҗЈ віө t в«Ҫ е…әвҗЈ еҶ• drвҗ® вҗЈ віө t вҗҰF віөвҗҫ

dF в«Ҫ dt вҗЈ

в«Ҫв«ә

е…әвҗЈ D вҗЈ еҶ• dr

в«әвҗҜ0 вӯҗ0.

віөвҗҫ

е…ұ вҗҫ S е…І 2 e вҗ® вҗЈ /T

еҶ• вҗҫ

е…ұ вҗ® N в«ә вҗ® D е…Іе…ұ e

е…ө e вҗ® вҗЈ (xв«№h,y,z)/T в«әe вҗ® вҗЈ (x,y,z)/T е…¶

е…ө e вҗ® вҗЈ (x,y,z)/T в«әe вҗ® вҗЈ (xв«әh,y,z)/T е…¶ , е…ұ19е…І

where е…і вҗҫ S (xв«ҫh/2,y,z) е…ҙ 2 is calculated as the geometric mean:

вҗЈ

е…і вҗҫ S е…ұ xв«ҫh/2,y,z е…Іе…ҙ 2 в«Ҫ вҗҫ S е…ұ xв«ҫh,y,z е…І вҗҫ S е…ұ x,y,z е…І .

е…© вөң вҗ® вҗЈе…© 2

S в«ә е…ө вҗ© TS в«№W TS е…¶ /T

еҶҚеҶӢеҶү еҶү еҶҠеҶҢ еҶӢ еҶү еҶҠеҶҢ

вҗҫ S xв«№ ,y,z

в«ә вҗҫ S xв«ә ,y,z

The reaction terms in Eq. е…ұ9bе…І can be rearranged in the same way, and give the negative of Eq. е…ұ17е…І. With the above choice of dynamics, it can be shown that the free energy is a decreasing function of time, вҗЈ

е…ұ20е…І

The discretized diffusion term for the lattice site ri becomes вҗ® N /T

в«әe

вҗ® D /T

е…ұ18е…І

віө вҗҫ вҗЈ е…ұ ri е…І в«Ҫ 2 DвҗЈ в¬ҳ вҗҫ S е…ұ ri е…І вҗҫ S е…ұ r j е…І віөt diffusion

в«» е…ұ e вҗ® вҗЈ (r j )/T в«әe вҗ® вҗЈ (ri )/T е…І .

е…ұ21е…І

[Page 4]

The summation ( е…ә в¬ҳ ) is taken over the neighboring sites with appropriate weighting factors:

е…әj в¬ҳ в«Ҫw 1 jиӢёn е…ә в«№w 2 jиӢёn е…ә в«№w 3 jиӢёn е…ә .

Note that the mode kв«Ҫ0 is excluded in this definition of е…· k е…ё so that 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё does not diverge when the system is completely uniform.

е…ұ22е…І

III. RESULTS

A. Morphological variations of aggregation processes

where n 1 , n 2 , and n 3 are the set of nearest neighbor, nextnearest neighbor, and next-next-nearest neighbor lattice sites, respectively. As in the preceding paper е…і13е…ҙ, the weighting factors are adopted from Ref. е…і19е…ҙ, that is, w 1 в«Ҫ0.294 726, w 2 в«Ҫ0.235 425, and w 3 в«Ҫ0.175 818. The discretized diffusion term here is the same as that introduced by Gouyet е…і20е…ҙ for describing order-disorder dynamics of alloys. The diffusion constant D вҗЈ may, in general, depend on species, but here we use D вҗЈ в«Ҫ0.1 for all species. The attempt frequency вҗҜ 0 of folding-unfolding transition rates is also set to 0.1. The spatial discretization of the diffusion-reaction Eq. е…ұ9е…І produces a stiff set of ordinary differential equations with respect to time t. Numerical integration of these ordinary equations was performed using an explicit Runge-KuttaChebyshev method of second order. We used the ROCK2 code developed by Abdulle and Medovikov е…і21е…ҙ. D. Analysis of dynamics simulations

The time evolution of the system is monitored in terms of the change in free energy, the relative fraction of the native protein ( f N в«Ҫ е…· вҗҫ N е…ё / е…· вҗҫ N в«№ вҗҫ D е…ё ), and the relative spatial deviation s of the native protein density е…і s N в«Ҫ еҶ‘е…· ( вҗҫ N в«ә е…· вҗҫ N е…ё ) 2 е…ё / е…· вҗҫ N е…ё е…ҙ . The angular brackets е…· е…ё denote averaging over the system. The morphology of denatured aggregates can be visualized by the isosurfaces of the density field of the denatured protein, вҗҫ D (r). In order to quantitatively examine morphological characteristics of aggregates, we make use of the characteristic length of the system defined in terms of the structure factor. First, defining the Fourier transform of вҗҫ P (r)в«Ҫ вҗҫ N (r)в«№ вҗҫ D (r) as

вҗҫЛҶ P е…ұ kе…І в«Ҫ

еҶ• вҗҫ

е…ұ rе…І e еҶ‘в«ә1kвҖўr,

е…ұ23е…І

the structure factor S(k) is given by ЛҶ P е…ұ kе…І вҗҫ ЛҶ P е…ұ в«әkе…І е…ё noise . S е…ұ kе…І в«Ҫ е…· вҗҫ

е…ұ24е…І

The brackets е…· е…ё noise on the RHS of Eq. е…ұ24е…І means averaging operation over different initial noise fields. In practice, we ЛҶ P (k) so that the valuse the discrete Fourier transform for вҗҫ ues of k are discrete. Following Shinozaki and Oono е…і22е…ҙ, the characteristic length scale is defined as 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё where

е…·kе…ёв«Ҫ

е…ә е…© kе…© в«ә1 S е…ұ kе…І

kв«Ҫ0

kв«Ҫ0

. е…© kе…© в«ә2 S е…ұ kе…І

е…ұ25е…І

We first performed several tentative simulations with small bulk density of the crowding agent вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05 in order to determine the range of the interaction parameter в‘Җ D,D that can cause the aggregation of the denatured protein. In all the following calculations, we set the bulk number density of the protein вҗі P в«Ҫ0.1, and all в‘Җ вҗЈ , вҗӨ в«Ҫ0 except for в‘Җ D,D . The initial density fields were set quasiuniform such that вҗҫ N (r) в«Ҫ0.5вҗі P е…і 1в«№ вҗ° N (r) е…ҙ , вҗҫ D (r)в«Ҫ0.5вҗі P е…і 1в«№ вҗ° D (r) е…ҙ , and вҗҫ C (r) в«Ҫ вҗі C е…і 1в«№ вҗ° C (r) е…ҙ where вҗ° вҗЈ (r) are uniform random fields in the range е…і в«ә0.1,0.1е…ҙ . Additional corrections were made to enforce the conditions that е…· вҗҫ N в«№ вҗҫ D е…ё в«Ҫ вҗі P , е…· вҗҫ C е…ё в«Ҫ вҗі C , and 0в¬Қ вҗҫ A (r)в¬Қ вҗі 0 for Aв«ҪN,D,C, and S. Each simulation consists of ten runs with the same parameters but with different initial random fields. The radii of the molecules were set as R N в«Ҫ0.4, R D в«Ҫ0.6, and R C в«Ҫ0.4, and the intrinsic free energy of the transition state protein is given by вҗ© TS в«Ҫ1. Two morphologically different regimes of aggregation of the denatured protein were found depending on the value of в‘Җ D,D е…ұFig. 1е…І. Figures 1е…ұaе…ІвҖ“1е…ұcе…І correspond to the simulation with в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.11 which is the minimum negative value for the aggregation to occur е…ұi.e., for в‘Җ D,D в¬Һв«ә0.11, aggregation was not observedе…І. In this simulation, a small number of the denatured aggregates of quasispherical shapes form after some latent time е…іFig. 1е…ұaе…І, tв«Ҫ6в«»103 ], which then grows rapidly. As the simulation proceeds, larger aggregates grow larger whereas smaller ones become even smaller and eventually vanish е…іFig. 1е…ұbе…Іе…ҙ. One large aggregate survives at the final stage е…іFig. 1е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ. This case with в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.11 may correspond to a nucleation regime of aggregation, and we call it the nucleationlike regime in the following. Figures 1е…ұdе…ІвҖ“1е…ұfе…І show the morphological evolution in the simulation with в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.2 which makes the system more liable to aggregate than the previous simulation. This case corresponds to the spinodal decomposition regime. In this simulation, a large number of small aggregates form immediately е…іFig. 1е…ұdе…І, tв«Ҫ3в«»102 ]. These small aggregates rapidly grow and coalesce to form large spongelike aggregates е…іFig. 1е…ұeе…Іе…ҙ, which then contract and split into smaller pieces е…іFig. 1е…ұfе…Іе…ҙ. During the course of evolution, the aggregates of complex shapes become of simpler and more spherical forms. The transient spongelike aggregates е…іFig. 1е…ұeе…Іе…ҙ are only loosely connected in the sense that the density of the denatured protein does not change significantly between inside and outside the aggregates. The aggregates at later stages е…іFig. 1е…ұfе…Іе…ҙ are denser. These differences of the aggregates in Figs. 1е…ұeе…І and 1е…ұfе…І are clearly seen in Fig. 2 where the distribution of the denatured proteins in the spongelike aggregates е…іFig. 2е…ұaе…Іе…ҙ is in sharp contrast to that in aggregates at a later stage е…іFig. 2е…ұbе…Іе…ҙ. Next we turn to the time evolution of physical quantities. Figure 3 shows the time evolution of characteristic length

[Page 5]

FIG. 2. Cross sections of the system with вҗі P в«Ҫ0.1 and в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.2. The density field of the denatured protein вҗҫ D (r) is shown. е…ұaе…І and е…ұbе…І correspond to tв«Ҫ1в«»103 е…іcf. Fig. 1е…ұeе…Іе…ҙ and tв«Ҫ1в«»105 е…іcf. Fig. 1е…ұfе…Іе…ҙ, respectively. Note that the gray scale ranges from 0 to 0.2 in е…ұaе…І, and from 0 to 1 in е…ұbе…І.

FIG. 1. Morphological evolution of the aggregates of the denatured proteins represented by the isosurface of вҗҫ D (r)в«Ҫ0.1. е…ұaе…ІвҖ“е…ұcе…І correspond to в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.11, and е…ұdе…ІвҖ“е…ұfе…І to в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.2. The bulk protein density вҗі P is set to 0.1 in both cases. Times: е…ұaе…І tв«Ҫ6 в«»103 , е…ұbе…І tв«Ҫ1в«»105 , е…ұcе…І tв«Ҫ5в«»105 , е…ұdе…І tв«Ҫ3в«»102 , е…ұeе…І tв«Ҫ1 в«»103 , and е…ұfе…І tв«Ҫ1в«»105 .

2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё , free energy, fraction of the native protein f N в«Ҫ е…· вҗҫ N е…ё / вҗі P , and relative spatial deviation of the native protein density s N в«Ҫ еҶ‘е…· ( вҗҫ N в«ә е…· вҗҫ N е…ё ) 2 е…ё / е…· вҗҫ N е…ё . The characteristic length 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё in the nucleationlike regime е…іFig. 3е…ұaе…І, dark lineе…ҙ initially increases until tв¬ғ1000 when it starts to decrease until tв¬ғ5000. The relative spatial deviation of the native protein density s N е…іFig. 3е…ұdе…Іе…ҙ indicates that aggregates begin to form at tв¬ғ5000 so that the sudden drop in 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё and its subsequent increase correspond to the embryonic and growing aggregates, respectively, whereas the initial increase in 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё may correspond to smoothing of the initial random fluctuations. The time evolution of 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё in the spinodal decomposition regime е…іFig. 3е…ұaе…І, light lineе…ҙ is rather modest compared to that in the nucleationlike one. After passing the initial hill around t в¬ғ100, 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё increases very slowly. Even after tв«Ҫ106 , it reaches only less than 20 е…ұunit lengthе…І. This extremely slow aggregation process may be attributed to the strong interaction between the denatured proteins в‘Җ D,D which hinders the diffusion of proteins to form larger aggregates. In the nucleationlike regime with в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.11, the free energy stays

FIG. 3. Time evolution of е…ұaе…І characteristic length scale 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё , е…ұbе…І free energy, е…ұcе…І fraction of the native protein, е…ұdе…І relative spatial deviation of the native protein density s N . In е…ұbе…І and е…ұcе…І, ten trajectories with different initial random fields are shown for each case, whereas е…ұdе…І focuses on one trajectory. Horizontal narrow lines in е…ұcе…І are the equilibrium values of f N in the uniform system.

[Page 6]

nearly fixed until the onset of aggregation at tв¬ғ104 е…іFig. 3е…ұbе…Іе…ҙ. The free energy rapidly drops when initial aggregates grow larger, but the rate of decrease becomes slow after a short period of time. The effect of initial random fields appears at very late stages of aggregation, but it does not influence the latent time for the onset of aggregation. Although the free energy stays constant in the beginning, the native fraction f N drops immediately until it reaches a plateau at t в¬ғ100 е…іFig. 3е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ where it stays at f N в¬ғ0.2. Then at the onset of aggregation f N sharply decreases. It is found that the value of f N at its plateau е…іFig. 3е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ is almost identical to the value of f N at equilibrium in the uniform phase е…іFig. 3е…ұcе…І, narrow lineе…ҙ which can be calculated from the self-consistent equations presented in the preceding paper е…і13е…ҙ. In the spinodal decomposition regime, immediate decrease in the free energy е…іFig. 3е…ұbе…Іе…ҙ is accompanied by the appearance of small aggregates е…іFig. 1е…ұdе…Іе…ҙ in early stages of aggregation process. When those small aggregates grow and the spongelike aggregates are formed е…іFig. 1е…ұeе…Іе…ҙ, the free energy stays almost constant. The free energy begins to decrease again at time tв¬ғ1000, when the spongelike aggregates become denser and begin to split. The initial decrease in f N е…іFig. 3е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ continues even after the free energy has reached the plateau е…іFig. 3е…ұbе…Іе…ҙ. Nevertheless it reaches a plateau at tв¬ғ100 with f N в¬Ү0.025 which is also almost identical to the value at equilibrium in the uniform phase е…іFig. 3е…ұcе…І, narrow lineе…ҙ. This plateau again corresponds to the spongelike aggregates е…іFig. 1е…ұeе…Іе…ҙ. The second decrease in f N seems to be synchronized with that in the free energy е…іFig. 3е…ұbе…Іе…ҙ. In this regime, the influence of initial random fields is negligible until late stages. In Fig. 3е…ұdе…І, we see a number of sharp spikes in the spatial deviation of вҗҫ N , s N . Visual inspection suggests that these spikes are associated with extinction of small denatured aggregates. Figure 4 shows a series of cross sections when a denatured aggregate vanishes in the case of the nucleationlike regime ( в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.11) corresponding to Figs. 1е…ұaе…ІвҖ“ 1е…ұcе…І. The native protein density вҗҫ N (r) is indeed very low in the denatured aggregates е…іFig. 4е…ұaе…Іе…ҙ. When a denatured aggregate vanishes at a site, вҗҫ N (r) increases at that site е…іFig. 4е…ұbе…Іе…ҙ. But this increase in вҗҫ N (r) is only a temporary one and the density fields вҗҫ N (r) and вҗҫ D (r) around the site where the vanished aggregate was located rapidly reorganize to become uniform е…іFig. 4е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ. Similar behaviors are also observed in the spinodal decomposition regime ( в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.2). In both the nucleationlike and spinodal decomposition regimes, the effect of the initial random fields on the aggregation process is not significant except for late stages. This was also true in other simulations presented below. Therefore, the time evolution of physical quantities such as free energy, native fraction ( f N ), and relative spatial deviation (s N ) is shown only for one trajectory for clarity. B. Crowding effects on aggregation process

We now examine effects of macromolecular crowding on the process of aggregation by performing dynamics simula-

FIG. 4. Cross section of the density fields of the native е…ұright panelsе…І and denatured е…ұleft panelsе…І proteins. Times: е…ұaе…І tв«Ҫ1.06 в«»105 , е…ұbе…І tв«Ҫ1.07в«»105 , е…ұcе…І tв«Ҫ1.08в«»105 . Note that the gray scale ranges from 0 to 1 in the left panels е…ұdenaturedе…І, and from 0 to 0.01 in the right panels е…ұnativeе…І.

tions for different values of the bulk crowding agent density вҗі C . The intrinsic free energy of the transition state protein is set to вҗ© TS в«Ҫ1 in this section. We first study the case of the nucleationlike regime. All the parameters except for вҗі C are the same as those given in the previous section: в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.11, вҗі P в«Ҫ0.1, R N в«ҪR C в«Ҫ0.4, and R D в«Ҫ0.6. Simulations with different values of вҗі C were performed. The morphological behavior was found to be essentially the same as depicted in Figs. 1е…ұaе…ІвҖ“1е…ұcе…І as long as aggregation occurred. The time evolution of some physical quantities is shown in Fig. 5. As is apparent from this figure, aggregation does not take place for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.4 or 0.8 е…ұFig. 5е…І, and the simulations resulted in a completely uniform phase, which is indicated by the value of spatial deviation s N nearly equal to zero е…іFig. 5е…ұdе…Іе…ҙ. The uniformity of the system is also reflected in the sharp drop in 2 вҗІ / е…· k е…ё for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.4 and 0.8 е…іFig. 5е…ұaе…Іе…ҙ: since the mode kв«Ҫ0 is not included in the definition of е…· k е…ё е…іEq. е…ұ25е…Іе…ҙ, only meaningless small modes are apparently left when modes converge to kв«Ҫ0, that is, when the system becomes completely uniform. It should be emphasized that the param-

[Page 7]

physical quantities with в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.11 е…ұnucleationlike regimeе…І. Horizontal narrow lines in е…ұcе…І are the equilibrium values of f N in the uniform system. Only one out of ten trajectories is shown in е…ұbе…І, е…ұcе…І, and е…ұdе…І for each set of simulations.

eter set in all the cases here corresponds to the aggregation phase at equilibrium е…і13е…ҙ although aggregation was not observed in the present dynamics simulations for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.4 and 0.8. Therefore, aggregation is kinetically inhibited. In these cases, the final values of f N are the same as the one obtained from equilibrium calculations for the uniform system. For вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05 and 0.2 е…ұFig. 5е…І, aggregation takes place. The time evolution of the native fraction f N shows that in the quasiuniform phase before the onset of aggregation the native protein is more stabilized in the case of вҗі C в«Ҫ0.2 than in the case of вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05. In addition, the onset of aggregation is earlier for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.2 than for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05. A phase diagram presented in our previous paper е…і13е…ҙ showed that, as вҗі C increases, the aggregation of the denatured proteins is more enhanced while the native protein is more stabilized as long as the system is uniform е…ұi.e., when aggregation does not occurе…І. Therefore, the time evolution of f N for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05 and 0.2 in Fig. 5е…ұcе…І exhibits crowding effects analogous to those at equilibrium, that is, in the aggregation process, as вҗі C increases, the onset of aggregation of the denatured protein is accelerated while the native protein is more stabilized in the quasiuniform phase before aggregation. It is observed that the values of f N at their plateau are almost identical to those at equilibrium in the uniform phase е…іFig. 5е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ. In the time range between tв¬ғ104 and в¬ғ5в«»105 , the growth of aggregates seems faster for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05 than for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.2 е…іFig. 5е…ұaе…Іе…ҙ. There are two possible reasons for this observation. First, it is expected that the effective diffusion rate is slower in the more crowded system so that the diffusion of proteins from vanishing aggregates and/or dissolved regions into growing aggregates becomes slower. Second, the presence of more crowding agents increasingly stabilizes all the aggregates so that disappearance of smaller aggregates is hindered. The latter point is supported by our previous results for the crowded system at equilibrium where it was shown that the aggregation of the denatured protein is enhanced as the crowding agent density is increased е…і13е…ҙ.

The difference becomes indistinguishable after tв¬ғ5 в«»105 because, in this time range, there is usually only one aggregate in the system so that the aggregation process is essentially finished and the final aggregate simply rearranges itself to become more spherical. For higher values of вҗі C е…ұв«Ҫ0.4 or 0.8е…І, the native protein is so highly stabilized in the quasiuniform phase before aggregation that the number of the denatured proteins is not large enough to form nuclei of aggregates; hence the system is trapped in a uniform state which is metastable. Next we examined the spinodal decomposition regime of aggregation ( в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.2) In this case, the aggregation of the denatured protein was observed for all the studied values of вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.8 е…ұnot shownе…І. Since aggregation is not usually observed in the living cell, the spinodal decomposition regime should be biologically less relevant than the nucleationlike regime. Therefore, hereafter we focus our attention to the latter. C. Crowding effects on folding, unfolding, and aggregation

We now turn to the crowding effects on protein folding, unfolding, and aggregation. As noted above, we limit our investigation to the nucleationlike regime in this section. In order to simulate folding and unfolding processes, two different initial conditions were used. As the initial condition for simulating folding process, we set вҗҫ N (r)в«Ҫ0.001вҗі P е…і 1 в«№ вҗ° N (r) е…ҙ , вҗҫ D (r)в«Ҫ0.999вҗі P е…і 1в«№ вҗ° D (r) е…ҙ , and вҗҫ C (r)в«Ҫ вҗі C е…і 1 в«№ вҗ° C (r) е…ҙ , where вҗ° вҗЈ (r) are uniform random fields in the range е…і в«ә0.1,0.1е…ҙ . This choice represents a situation in which the proteins are mostly denatured at the beginning of the simulation; hence we call such a simulation an вҖҳвҖҳinitially denatured simulation.вҖҷвҖҷ On the other hand, the initial condition for simulating the unfolding process is such that the proteins are mostly in their native state initially, namely, вҗҫ N (r) в«Ҫ0.999вҗі P е…і 1в«№ вҗ° N (r) е…ҙ , вҗҫ D (r)в«Ҫ0.001вҗі P е…і 1в«№ вҗ° D (r) е…ҙ , and the crowding agent density field is the same as above. We call

[Page 8]

characteristic length е…ұaе…І and е…ұbе…І; fraction of the native protein е…ұcе…І and е…ұdе…І. е…ұaе…І and е…ұcе…І correspond to вҖҳвҖҳinitially denatured simulations,вҖҷвҖҷ and е…ұbе…І and е…ұdе…І to вҖҳвҖҳinitially native simulationsвҖҷвҖҷ with вҗ© TS в«Ҫ1.

the simulation with such an initial condition the вҖҳвҖҳinitially native simulation.вҖҷвҖҷ The first set of simulations was performed with the same choice of parameters as in the previous sections: в‘Җ D,D в«Ҫв«ә0.11, вҗі P в«Ҫ0.1, R N в«ҪR C в«Ҫ0.4, and R D в«Ҫ0.6. We also note that the intrinsic free energy of the transition state protein is set as вҗ© TS в«Ҫ1 in this case so the activation free energies of folding and unfolding in the dilute solution, вҗ© TS в«ә вҗ© D and вҗ© TS в«ә вҗ© N , are both equal to unity. The results of the simulations with different values of the bulk crowding agent density вҗі C are shown in Fig. 6. In both cases of initially denatured and initially native simulations, aggregation of the denatured protein occurs for вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05 and 0.2 but not for higher values of вҗі C (в«Ҫ0.4 and 0.8е…І. In other words, whether or not the aggregation occurs is independent of the initial fraction of the native protein in the present case. For the cases in which the aggregation occurs ( вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05 and 0.2е…І, the characteristic length becomes larger in the initially native simulations than in the initially denatured ones before the onset of the aggregation е…іFigs. 6е…ұaе…І and 6е…ұbе…Іе…ҙ. For the cases in which the aggregation does not occur ( вҗі C в«Ҫ0.4 and 0.8е…І, the rate of folding is faster for more crowded solutions е…іFig. 6е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ. However, as soon as the initial plateau in the fraction of the native protein f N is reached, the time evolution of the characteristic length f N and the relative spatial deviation of the native protein field s N in later stages all show almost the identical behavior in the initially denatured е…іFigs. 6е…ұaе…І and 6е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ and initially native е…іFigs. 6е…ұbе…І and 6е…ұdе…Іе…ҙ simulations; namely, they are the same as presented in the previous section. Next we examine the case in which the protein folds and unfolds more slowly. This case is simulated with the intrinsic free energy of the transition state protein вҗ© TS в«Ҫ5 so that the activation free energies of folding and unfolding in the dilute solution are as high as 5 unit energy. Other parameters are the same as in the previous paragraph. These simulations exhibit qualitatively different behaviors depending on the initial fraction of the native protein е…ұFig. 7е…І.

When the proteins are mostly denatured initially е…ұinitially denatured simulationsе…І, aggregation of the denatured protein occurs for all the values of вҗі C (в«Ҫ0.05, 0.2, 0.4, and 0.8е…І, and the onset of aggregation is earlier in more crowded solutions. However, when the proteins are mostly native initially е…ұinitially native simulationsе…І, the aggregation does not occur for high values of вҗі C (в«Ҫ0.4 and 0.8е…І. Furthermore, for the cases in which the aggregation occurs in both initially native and initially denatured simulations ( вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05 and 0.2е…І, the onset of aggregation is much earlier and the plateau in f N before the onset is not observed in the initially denatured case. The time evolution of the characteristic length for the initially native simulations with вҗі C в«Ҫ0.05 and 0.2 indicates that the system becomes almost completely uniform before the onset of aggregation, but so is not the case in the initially denatured simulations in which the characteristic length exhibits only a minor increase before the onset of the aggregation. To summarize, compared to the proteins with low folding and unfolding activation free energies ( вҗ© TS в«ә вҗ© D в«Ҫ вҗ© TS в«ә вҗ© N в«Ҫ1), the ones with high activation free energies ( вҗ© TS в«ә вҗ© D в«Ҫ вҗ© TS в«ә вҗ© N в«Ҫ5) are more prone to aggregation when the proteins are initially denatured, and whether or not aggregation occurs depends on the initial conditions. Figure 7 also suggests that the aggregation of slow-folding proteins may be suppressed in highly crowded conditions once most of the proteins have reached the native state. IV. DISCUSSION

The present simulations revealed morphological variations in the process of aggregation of denatured proteins. However, as far as we are aware at present, there is no experimental works on the morphological evolution of the aggregates of denatured proteins. Yong et al. е…і23е…ҙ used small angle neutron scattering to study the intermediate structure of amyloid fibril assembly. The same technique or light scattering е…і24е…ҙ should be applicable to study the structure of the denatured protein aggregates.

[Page 9]

characteristic length е…ұaе…І and е…ұbе…І; fraction of the native protein е…ұcе…І and е…ұdе…І. е…ұaе…І and е…ұcе…І correspond to initially denatured simulations, and е…ұbе…І and е…ұdе…І to initially native simulations with вҗ© TS в«Ҫ5.

Our simulations suggest that macromolecular crowding effects on aggregation е…ұwhen it occursе…І can be classified into three categories, namely, е…ұiе…І stabilization of the native protein before the onset of aggregation, е…ұiiе…І acceleration of the onset of aggregation and growth of aggregates at early stages, and е…ұiiiе…І deceleration of the equilibrating process of aggregation at later stages. These three types of crowding effect observed in both the nucleationlike and spinodal decomposition regimes, and become more conspicuous for more crowded solutions. We have shown in our previous paper е…і13е…ҙ that, as the bulk density of the crowding agent increases, the native protein is stabilized unless aggregation occurs, and aggregation of the denatured protein is enhanced. Therefore, the crowding effects е…ұiе…І and е…ұiiе…І above are analogous to those at equilibrium. The experimental observation that crowding accelerates amyloid formation е…і8е…ҙ partly supports the simulation results е…ұiiе…І. Experimental validation of the stabilization effect of crowding е…ұiе…І listed above will require time-resolved techniques since the latent time before the onset of aggregation may be short. For large values of the bulk density of crowding agent вҗі C (в«Ҫ0.4 or 0.8е…І in the nucleationlike regime, aggregation is inhibited and the system becomes uniform in which a substantial fraction of the native proteins is dissolved е…ұFig. 5е…І. In reality, this inhibition of aggregation by the crowding agent is not indefinite since thermal fluctuation will sometimes cause the formation of nuclei of aggregates some of which may grow to a macroscopic extent. In our present model, however, no thermal fluctuation е…ұrandom noiseе…І is included in the diffusion-reaction equations е…ұ9е…І; hence aggregation cannot occur once the system becomes uniform. Inclusion of random noise terms representing thermal fluctuation is left for future studies. Nevertheless, the present results and previous ones е…і13е…ҙ suggest that macromolecular crowding may help to kinetically prevent aggregation of denatured proteins inside the living cell despite the fact that the aggregation is more favored at equilibrium. The simulations with initially native and initially dena-

tured proteins indicate that crowding accelerates the rate of folding for fast-folding proteins as well as the onset of aggregation for slow-folding proteins. These results can be compared to the experimental results of van den Berg et al. е…і25,26е…ҙ who studied folding of oxidized and reduced hen lysozyme in varying concentrations of crowding agents. The folding rate of the reduced lysozyme is known to be smaller than that of the oxidized lysozyme. van den Berg et al. found that the folding rate of the oxidized lysozyme is significantly increased while that of the reduced lysozyme is retarded in the presence of a high concentration of crowding agents such as bovine serum albumin and Ficoll е…і26е…ҙ. They have also shown in another experiment that folding of the reduced lysozyme is severely disturbed by crowding agents, resulting in irreversible aggregation of non-native structures, while the folding yield of the oxidized lysozyme was essentially unaffected е…і25е…ҙ. Some of these experimental observations are in good accordance with the present dynamics simulations. That is, the folding rate of fast-folding proteins becomes faster in more crowded solutions е…іFig. 6е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ, while folding of slow-folding proteins is disturbed, resulting in aggregation е…іFig. 7е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ. However, the folding yield of fast-folding proteins in the present simulation increases in more crowded solutions е…іFig. 6е…ұcе…Іе…ҙ, which is not consistent with the experiment. е…ұNote that the experiments of van den Berg et al. е…і25,26е…ҙ were also discussed in terms of the size dependence of the crowding effect in our previous paper е…і13е…ҙ.е…І The difference between fast- and slow-folding proteins regarding the tendency for aggregation has an important implication in biological contexts, that is, fast-folding proteins are less liable to aggregation so that even if they are denatured at one time they can rapidly refold to the native state and avoid quasi-irreversible aggregation. Recently, molecular simulation studies have been performed to investigate the competition between protein folding and aggregation е…і10вҖ“12е…ҙ. These simulations with detailed description of protein molecules have revealed the sensitivity of the native and aggregate conformations to

[Page 10]

amino acid sequences е…і10,12е…ҙ. However, no simulation has been performed so far to study macromolecular crowding effects on protein folding and aggregation. Klimov et al. е…і27е…ҙ carried out molecular simulations of folding of a single protein chain е…ұa вҗӨ -hairpin peptideе…І confined inside a spherical pore. Molecular confinement imposes effects similar to macromolecular crowding е…і4е…ҙ. Klimov et al. е…і27е…ҙ found that molecular confinement generally accelerates the folding of the вҗӨ -hairpin formation, and that this acceleration is not monotonic with respect to the radius of the spherical pore but has a maximum value at the radius of the sphere that is 50% larger than that of the folded вҗӨ -hairpin peptide. They also report that the denatured state ensemble in the confined system was significantly different from that in the bulk system е…і27е…ҙ. Therefore, the present density functional simulations are in qualitative agreement regarding the acceleration effect of crowding or confinement, but the results of the molecular simulations suggest that it is important to take into account protein chain conformations explicitly. In the present theoretical framework, all the molecules are assumed to be spherical with fixed sizes; hence the conformational changes of the denatured protein due to crowding are not treated. However, it is possible to include such conformational changes in the present theory. A trivial possibility is to assume multiple conformational species with different sizes for

We presented a dynamic density functional theory which describes a system consisting of proteins and macromolecules. The results of dynamics simulations are qualitatively in good agreement with experimental observations regarding acceleration of aggregation, acceleration of folding for fastfolding proteins, and disturbed folding of slow-folding proteins. A dynamic stabilization effect by crowding was also observed. The present theory, with possible calibration of interaction parameters, may provide insights into the properties and behaviors of proteins inside the living cell.

е…і1е…ҙ A.B. Fulton, Cell 30, 345 е…ұ1982е…І. е…і2е…ҙ S.B. Zimmerman and A.P. Minton, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 22, 27 е…ұ1993е…І. е…і3е…ҙ A.P. Minton, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10, 34 е…ұ2000е…І. е…і4е…ҙ A.P. Minton, J. Biol. Chem. 276, 10577 е…ұ2001е…І. е…і5е…ҙ R.J. Ellis, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11, 114 е…ұ2001е…І. е…і6е…ҙ R.J. Ellis, Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 597 е…ұ2001е…І. е…і7е…ҙ M. Bucciantini, E. Giannoni, F. Chiti, F. Baroni, L. Formigli, J. Zurdo, N. Taddei, G. Ramponi, C.M. Dobson, and M. Stefani, Nature е…ұLondonе…І 416, 507 е…ұ2002е…І. е…і8е…ҙ D.M. Hatters, A.P. Minton, and G.J. Howlett, J. Biol. Chem. 277, 7824 е…ұ2002е…І. е…і9е…ҙ A.P. Minton, Methods Enzymol. 295, 127 е…ұ1998е…І. е…і10е…ҙ P.M. Harrison, H.S. Chan, S.B. Prusiner, and F.E. Cohen, J. Mol. Biol. 286, 593 е…ұ1999е…І. е…і11е…ҙ A.V. Smith and C.K. Hall, J. Mol. Biol. 312, 187 е…ұ2001е…І. е…і12е…ҙ R.I. Dima and D. Thirumalai, Protein Sci. 11, 1036 е…ұ2002е…І. е…і13е…ҙ A.R. Kinjo and S. Takada, Phys. Rev. E 66, 031911 е…ұ2002е…І. е…і14е…ҙ K. Kawasaki, Non-Equilibrium and Phase Transition е…ұAsakura Shoten, Tokyo, 2000е…І е…ұin Japaneseе…І. е…і15е…ҙ T. Kawakatsu, Foundations of Polymer Physics е…ұSaiensu Sha, Tokyo, 2001е…І е…ұin Japaneseе…І. е…і16е…ҙ J.G.E.M. Fraaije, B.A.C. van Vlimmeren, N.M. Maurits, M.

Postma, O.A. Evers, C. Hoffmann, P. Altevogt, and G. Goldbeck-Wood, J. Chem. Phys. 106, 4260 е…ұ1997е…І. е…і17е…ҙ L.D. Landau and I.M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics, Part I, 3rd ed. е…ұIwanami Shoten, Tokyo, 1980е…І е…ұJapanese translationе…І. е…і18е…ҙ A. Fersht, Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science е…ұFreeman, New York, 1999е…І. е…і19е…ҙ B.A.C. van Vlimmeren and J.G.E.M. Fraaije, Comput. Phys. Commun. 99, 21 е…ұ1996е…І. е…і20е…ҙ J.F. Gouyet, Phys. Rev. E 51, 1695 е…ұ1995е…І. е…і21е…ҙ A. Abdulle and A.A. Medovikov, Numer. Math. 90, 1 е…ұ2001е…І. е…і22е…ҙ A. Shinozaki and Y. Oono, Phys. Rev. E 48, 2622 е…ұ1993е…І. е…і23е…ҙ W. Yong, A. Lomakin, M.D. Kirkitadze, D.B. Teplow, S.H. Chen, and G.B. Benedek, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 150 е…ұ2002е…І. е…і24е…ҙ T.G. Parker and D.G. Dalgleish, Biopolymers 16, 2533 е…ұ1977е…І. е…і25е…ҙ B. van den Berg, R.J. Ellis, and C.M. Dobson, EMBO J. 18, 6927 е…ұ1999е…І. е…і26е…ҙ B. van den Berg, R. Wain, C.M. Dobson, and R.J. Ellis, EMBO J. 19, 3870 е…ұ2000е…І. е…і27е…ҙ D.K. Klimov, D. Newfield, and D. Thirumalai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 8019 е…ұ2002е…І. е…і28е…ҙ A.P. Minton, Biophys. J. 78, 101 е…ұ2000е…І.

the ensemble of denatured proteins, as was done by Minton е…і28е…ҙ in his statistical thermodynamic theory of crowding effects on protein stability. Another possible way is to treat chain conformations explicitly as is done in density functional simulations of polymer melts е…і15,16е…ҙ, although this extension may be complicated because of the uniqueness of the native conformation. Nevertheless, the present density functional approach will serve to investigate mesoscopic to macroscopic behaviors of protein aggregation and macromolecular crowding which can well complement microscopic molecular simulation studies.

V. CONCLUSION
