[Page 1]

Cite This: J. Phys. Chem. B 2018, 122, 5678−5693

pubs.acs.org/JPCB

Transferable Coarse-Grained Models of Liquid−Liquid Equilibrium Using Local Density Potentials Optimized with the Relative Entropy Tanmoy Sanyal and M. Scott Shell* Department of Chemical Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California, United States

Downloaded via KYOTO UNIV on April 7, 2022 at 08:01:16 (UTC). See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

S Supporting Information *

ABSTRACT: Bottom-up coarse-grained (CG) models are now regularly pursued to enable large length and time scale molecular simulations of complex, often macromolecular systems. However, predicting fluid phase equilibria using such models remains fundamentally challenging. A major problem stems from the typically low transferability of CG models beyond the densities and/or compositions at which they are parametrized, which is necessary if they are to describe distinct structural and thermodynamic properties unique to each phase. CG model transferability is compounded by the representation of the inherently multibody coarse interactions using pair potentials that neglect higher order effects. Here, we propose to construct transferable single site CG models of liquid mixtures by supplementing traditional CG pair interactions with local density potentials, which constitute a computationally inexpensive mean-field approach to describe many-body effects, in that site energies are modulated by the local solution environment. To illustrate the approach, we use intra- and interspecies local density potentials to develop CG models of benzene−water solutions that show impressive transferability in structural metrics (pair correlation functions, density profiles) throughout composition space, in contrast to pair-only CG representations. While further refinement may be necessary to represent more complex thermodynamic properties, like the liquid−liquid interfacial tension, the generality and improvement offered by the local density approach are highly encouraging for enabling complex phase equilibrium modeling using CG models.

I. INTRODUCTION Equilibrium fluid phase transitions play a pivotal role in many technologies, ranging from complex fluids in consumer products to separation strategies in large-scale chemical processing. Particularly for liquid mixtures, phase transition forms the basis of liquid−liquid extraction, a unit operation with widespread applications in food processing, organic synthesis, petroleum refineries, renewable energy, nuclear reprocessing, and biotechnology, for example. Molecular simulation methods for predicting phase equilibria for small, relatively rigid molecular species are now well established,1,2 and typically require clever sampling Monte Carlo (MC) techniques3,4 such as Gibbs-ensemble MC,5 multiple histogram reweighting,6,7 or transition-matrix MC.8 Tackling the phase equilibrium problem for large, flexible, or asymmetrically sized species remains a critical challenge and a major research effort. Coarse-grained (CG) models potentially offer a promising route for complex phase equilibrium calculations through simpler representations that are dramatically easier to sample, particularly for MC algorithms that involve particle insertions but also for direct interfacial simulations using molecular dynamics (MD) that require long equilibration run times. Indeed, the past decade has seen significant progress in CG model development, with a particular effort directed toward biomacromolecular systems (e.g., polypeptides and polynucleo© 2018 American Chemical Society

tides) and their folding and self-assembly. CG descriptions of biomolecules have been motivated both by bottom-up methods that parametrize on the basis of small representative all-atom models and by top-down approaches that tune CG interactions to match macroscopic thermophysical properties. A number of these approaches have proven successful in capturing firstorder-type structural and thermodynamic transitions. A few examples include morphological phase transitions in membranes and bilayers9−12 (e.g., using the MARTINI CG model13), and studies of folding−unfolding transitions in proteins and peptides.14−21 Despite the burgeoning success in the biomolecular realm, CG models do not yet seem widely capable of capturing f luid phase equilibria (although there are notable efforts along this direction, as we shortly describe), which has limited their routine application to chemical thermodynamics problems. The main roadblock in developing CG models of equilibrium fluid phase behavior stems from their lack of transferability, i.e., their limited ability to translate to thermodynamic states (density, composition, etc.) different from the one at which Special Issue: Ken A. Dill Festschrift Received: December 18, 2017 Revised: February 13, 2018 Published: February 21, 2018

[Page 2]

number or composition. Allen and Rutledge initially explored a similar approach in which they supplemented conventional solute−solvent pair interactions with effective solvent-mediated intersolute interactions.34,35,42 They expressed these additional interactions in terms of the excess chemical potential associated with transferring a solute from a solvent-exposed to a completely solute-locked state, and parametrized the excess chemical potential as functions of both the global and local solute density. In a previous article, we introduced a general approach to CG local density potentials that we tested in model aqueous solutions, where water was coarse-grained away to an implicit description with only effective intersolute interactions remaining.41 In that effort, we found that both the fidelity of the CG model and its transferability significantly improved with the addition of local density potentials. Voth and co-workers subsequently employed local density dependent interactions to improve the characterization of vapor−liquid interfaces in methanol and acetronitrile.43 Noid and co-workers also found that local density dependent potentials improved CG models of methanol, allowing parametrization in the bulk liquid that transfer well to the vapor−liquid coexistence.44 Here, we extend our previous work on local density potentials to outline a general strategy for transferable CG models suitable for phase equilibria, using a coarse-graining theoretical framework based on the relative entropy.26,45 As with conventional bottom-up coarse-graining, we use an underlying AA reference simulation to parametrize CG pair interactions between species, but we also simultaneously parametrize intra- and interspecies local-density potentials. While our previous work showed that local density potentials aid in capturing cooperative folding and association like behaviors for solutes in implicit solvent,41 the present work explores the generality of local density potentials in mixtures capable of macroscopic phase separation into chemically distinct environments. As a case study, we investigate macroscopic phase separation in benzene−water mixtures, which provides an excellent and challenging test system because of the water−benzene size asymmetry and the intrinsically multibody nature of watermediated hydrophobic interactions.46−51 An earlier study of this system by Villa et al.52 examined the transferability of single-site CG representations of benzene and water parametrized from very dilute benzene solutions (0.1 M), and using an advanced implementation of the iterative Boltzmann inversion technique. These CG models demonstrated transferability in describing structural and thermodynamic metrics like pair correlations and the chemical potential at low concentrations but produced qualitatively incorrect behavior at high benzene concentrations (∼9.5 M) that missed the macroscopic liquid−liquid phase separation, illustrating inherent challenges in capturing this system’s composition transferability. In this paper, we develop force fields for single-site CG models of benzene−water mixtures that augment CG pair interactions with local density potentials. Here, we add four distinct such potentials that modulate the energy of a CG molecule based on its identity (benzene or water) and its average (mean-field) concentration of either species within a short-range distance cutoff. We parametrize CG models from AA reference systems at several distinct compositions to investigate the effect of AA reference on model quality. Subsequently, we benchmark the structural and thermodynamic transferability of the CG models across composition space,

they were parametrized. This prevents accurate realization of phase behavior that inherently spans the range of states encompassing the phases of interest, and is a particular problem for bottom-up CG strategies. One contributor to transferability issues is neglect of the strong coupling between the reduced CG degrees of freedom in the model. In principle, an “ideal” bottom-up CG force field is represented by a highly multidimensional free energy function W(R), constructed by projecting the all-atom (AA) potential UAA(r) on the CG degrees of freedom R:22 W (R) = −kBT ln

∫V dr exp[−βUAA(r)]δ(R − M(r))

Here, M is a “mapping function” that translates an AA configuration r to a CG one R, and β = 1/kBT. Unfortunately, W(R) is highly multibody and difficult to implement practically; instead, CG force fields typically contain pairwise nonbonded interactions between CG sites (in addition to conventional bonded terms), effectively ignoring true higher order many-body correlations in the underlying potential of mean force.23−28 In turn, this tends to make the CG model sensitive to the thermodynamic state (density and/or composition) at which it is developed, and limits not only the model’s capability to scale to other states but also its ability to simultaneously reproduce different properties even at the reference state, as discussed extensively in the works of Louis, Head-Gordon, and co-workers.29,30 One resolution that has been particularly successful for CG water models has been to include explicit three-body terms.31−33 However, such approaches may become computationally expensive to parametrize and use in general, particularly if the form and order of the physically relevant interactions are not known. A second approach has been to include information about the local environment around a pair of CG particles to modulate the pair potential between them.34−37 Recently, Voth and co-workers developed a theory of ultra-coarse-graining (UCG) that produces low resolution CG models where CG sites embed discrete internal states that are in a state of local quasi-equilibrium.38 They used this technique to mix separate CG force fields for different phases in a phase-separated liquid mixture, based on the location of the phase interface as well as a local-density parameter that can discriminate between the two phases. These authors applied the approach to vapor−liquid equilibrium in a Lennard-Jones fluid and the cooperative aggregation of neopentane in methanol. Noid and co-workers also developed transferable CG models of heptane−toluene mixtures by expanding the force field with global volume-based corrections, such that the model reproduces correct NPT fluctuations in density and pressure and consequently the pressure−volume equation of state.39 Here, we take a distinct approach and use so-called “local density” potentials to expand the CG force field with mean-field representations of multibody effects that in turn improve transferability. In this case, the CG potential is inspired by mean-field embedded-atom models of metals,40 in which sites have energies that directly depend on the local density of neighboring CG sites (within a cutoff radius), and these potentials serve as an additive correction over traditional pair interactions.41 Such potentials are mean-field in nature, which allows them to remain inexpensive, but they account for higherorder interactions beyond pair in a manner modulated by the local environment of a particle, such as the local coordination

[Page 3]

Figure 1. Atomistic system (left) and single site CG model (right) of a 10% mole fraction benzene/90% water solution, with a total of 500 molecules. The cubic box length of 27.45 Å is tuned to achieve 1 atm pressure in the AA system at 300 K. In the CG model, molecular orientational degrees of freedom are coarse-grained away and effective intermolecular interactions are determined by relative entropy minimization.

We consider several illustrative cases for CG force fields. Each contains three distinct CG pair interactions modeled by splines, in addition to potentially four LD interactions between all possible species and environment types. For convenience, the CG pair potentials are referred to as simply pair-αβ or αβ pair potentials, while the LD potentials are annotated as LD-αβ, where α, β = B (benzene) or W (water). Note that pair-αβ and pair-βα denote the same potential, while LD-αβ and LD-βα do not, given the asymmetric role between central and neighboring site types. Figure 2 schematically shows the different types of

spanning both sides of the phase transition point predicted by the reference AA force field. We discuss both the improvements the local density strategy enables and the limitations that we find.

II. METHODS II.A. CG Model and Force Field Design. The CG model, as illustrated in Figure 1, maps benzene and water molecules to single sites and, in that sense, is an explicit water CG model unlike our previous test of local-density CG interactions.41 In the present case, the local density is essentially a local coordination number, and is given for a central CG site i of type α with neighboring sites j of type β by ρiαβ = ∑ φ(rij) j≠i j∈β

where φ(rij) is an indicator function based on the pair distance rij, that sharply but smoothly interpolates to zero at a cutoff radius rc. We use the computationally efficient form ⎧1 r ≤ r0 ⎪ ⎪ φ(r ) = ⎨ c0 + c 2r + c4r + c6r r ∈ (r0 , rc) ⎪ ⎪0 r ≥ rc ⎩

The coefficients c0, c2, c4, and c6 are determined41 by imposing continuity of φ and its first derivatives at the cutoff rc and a slightly smaller inner-cutoff r0, which we fix as rc − 1 Å for the this work. The LD potential of type αβ due to all central CG sites of type α and neighbors of type β then follows αβ ULD = ∑ f αβ (ρiαβ ) i∈α

Figure 2. Schematic representations of central (α) and neighboring (β) species configurations for the different types of LD potentials outlined in Table 1. Yellow CG sites denote benzene, and blue CG sites are water.

where the summation proceeds only over atoms of type α. The functions fαβ are yet unknown and are determined as splines by optimizing the CG model. Although Uαβ LD is a mean-field manybody potential, it gives rise to a pair-additive force f iαβ = −

∑ j≠i i∈α ,j∈β

possible LD-αβ potentials. If all possible LD potentials are included with the three pair potentials, the overall CG Hamiltonian reads as

⎡ αβ αβ df βα (ρjβα ) ⎤ dφ(rij) ri − rj ⎢ df (ρi ) + ⎥ ⎢ ⎥ dr rij ⎣ ⎦

BB UCG = ∑ u pair (rij) + i<j i,j∈B

WW BW ∑ upair (rij) + ∑ u pair (rij)

i<j i,j∈W

i<j i∈B j∈W

+ ∑ [f BB (ρi BB ) + f BW (ρi BW )]

i∈B

The reader is referred to ref 41 for further details on the formulation of LD potentials, including expressions for the coefficients in eq 3.

+ ∑ [f WW (ρi WW ) + f WB (ρi WB )] i∈W

[Page 4]

Table 1. Case Studies for Local Density Potentials Examined in This Worka CG force field case

pair potentials

LD potentials

pair-only pair + LD-BB pair + LD-WW pair + LD-BW pair + LD-WB pair + LD-all

pair-BB, pair-WW, pair-BW pair-BB, pair-WW, pair-BW pair-BB, pair-WW, pair-BW pair-BB, pair-WW, pair-BW pair-BB, pair-WW, pair-BW pair-BB, pair-WW, pair-BW

none LD-BB LD-WW LD-BW LD-WB LD-BB, LD-WW, LD-BW, LD-WB

We consider cases involving zero, one, or all possible (total of four) local density potentials that differ in the central and neighboring molecule types.

We study a total of six distinct force fields, which are summarized in Table 1. This includes the control with only pair potentials, the full potential of eq 6 involving all four local density potentials, and four subsets in which only one of the local density terms is used. The cutoffs for determining local densities for the like LD potentials (LD-BB and LD-WW) are chosen to include the first coordination shell from their first minimum in the respective radial distribution functions; these distances are arithmetically averaged to determine the cutoffs for the unlike potentials (LD-BW and LD-WB). Admittedly, including all four LD potentials (the pair + LDall force field) may contain redundant information, since local densities essentially measure coordination numbers and these are subject to geometric constraints in condensed, incompressible fluids. To illustrate this point using simple lattice statistics, consider zBB, zWW, zBW, and zWB as the average nearest-neighbor coordination numbers of the different types, for N total CG particles (benzene and water) with xB benzene mole fraction (and xW = 1 − xB water mole fraction) on a lattice with N sites. One might think of zαβ = ραβ, where ⟨ ⟩ denotes ensemble averaging. If each molecule occupies a single lattice site and the total lattice nearest neighbor coordination number is z (e.g., z = 6 for a cubic lattice), balances on connections between sites produce z = zBB + zBW = zWW + zWB and xBzBW = xWzWB. These three constraint equations show that, at most, one of the four possible local densities are independent once the mole fraction is specified. Of course, the off-lattice nature of the actual CG model means that the local coordination shell is not truly constrained to a fixed number of neighbors, and of course, the benzene−water size asymmetry introduces additional complications. Still, this analysis illustrates that the addition of all four local density potentials may not be necessary to cover the functional space or basis that these interactions provide beyond pair potentials, as long as the system remains in a condensed phase. In particular, this analysis also motivates consideration of CG force fields using a single LD potential, namely, the second, third, and fourth rows of Table 1. In our approach, we represent all CG interactionsboth pair and local densityby cubic B-splines. The spline knots form the optimizable parameters of the model and are determined by minimizing the relative entropy between the model and its atomistic reference.26,45 The relative entropy provides a way to quantitatively compare the quality of a CG model by measuring the loss in information upon coarse-graining the AA system to a reduced set of CG degrees of freedom with a particular CG force field. Minimizing the relative entropy increases the overlap between the ensemble microstate probability distributions of the AA and CG models, and provides a natural strategy for parametrizing CG force fields. In the canonical ensemble, the relative entropy takes the form26

Srel = β⟨UCG(λ) − UAA ⟩AA − β(A CG(λ) − AAA ) + Smap

where UX and AX are the potential and Helmholtz free energies in ensemble X = AA or CG, which are functions of the CG force field parameters λ, namely, in this case, the spline knots of all component potentials. Here, Smap is a mapping entropy that measures the degeneracy associated with the AA to CG mapping; it is independent of the CG potential and thus does not depend on these parameters. The derivative of the relative entropy in λ space (for the full potential with all LD terns) can be written as ∂Srel =β ∂λ

∑ (α , β) ∈ (BB,WW,BW)

+β

−

⎧ ⎪ ∑⎨ i<j ⎪ ⎩

∑

αβ (rij) ∂u pair

∂λ

∂λ

AA

⎧ ⎪

∑⎨

(α , β) i∈α ⎪ ⎩ ∈ (BB,WW,BW,WB)

∂f αβ (ρiαβ )

−

∂λ

αβ (rij) ∂u pair

⎫ ⎪ ⎬ ⎪ CG ⎭

⎫ ⎪ ⎬ ⎪ CG ⎭

∂f αβ (ρiαβ ) ∂λ AA

where the set of local density potentials given by atom-type combinations (α, β) would differ across the different cases in Table 1. The coarse-graining algorithm proceeds by locating the minimum of Srel in λ space, i.e., the zeros of eq 8, using a combination of nonlinear conjugate gradient and quasi-Newton methods. Details are provided in our earlier work.41,45 II.B. Simulation Details. Atomistic simulations of aqueous benzene solutions are carried out at 300 K and 1 atm pressure, with 500 molecules, spanning a range of benzene mole fractions from xB = 10 to 90%. For these, we use the MD engine GROMACS (version 4.6.5)53,54 and employ the GROMOS 53a6 force field55 for benzene and the SPC/E model of water.56 All bonds are constrained using the LINCS algorithm.57,58 The system is first equilibrated in an NPT ensemble using the Parinello−Rahman barostat59 and Nosé−Hoover thermostat60,61 for 44 ns to determine the equilibrium bulk density (data from the last 4 ns is used to estimate average equilibrium box volume) followed by a further 60−80 ns of equilibration under NVT conditions, the last 40 ns of which is used to collect trajectory data. It should be mentioned that a previous study inferred that the AA force field overpredicts the solubility of benzene in water by almost an order of magnitude;52 while the experimental solubility is 0.02 M,62 benzene and water were still found to be miscible at 0.5 M, which likely stems from the reported underestimation of benzene hydration free energy by the GROMOS 53a6 force field.63 However, the present study is only interested in the ability of optimized CG systems to

[Page 5]

Figure 3. Intra- and intermolecular local density potentials (top row) and pair potentials (bottom row) optimized with the relative entropy from reference atomistic benzene solutions at 10% (orange and blue), 50% (red and purple), and 90% (black and green) benzene mole fraction. The BB and WW pair potentials show the most significant differences when optimized simultaneously with all four LD potentials. Unlike LD potentials, potentials of types BW and WB are likely modulated by the small number of intermolecular multibody correlations at the interface, characterized by the low range of local density (∼2) over which they change.

potentials for the pair-only and pair + LD-all force fields, as described in Table 1. For all of the references, the BB pair potentials with and without the use of LD potentials have similar forms and are largely repulsive; only for the dilute 10% reference solution do they exhibit a slightly attractive (∼ −0.2 kcal/mol) interaction around 6.5 Å. It is instructive to note that this attractive well is not as significant as the value −0.6 kcal/ mol reached for a pair-only CG BB potential reported previously that was developed from an even more dilute benzene solution (xB ≈ 0.002).52 On the other hand, the BB LD potentials are largely all attractive, and the version parametrized from the 50% solution shows the largest decrease of around 2.5 kcal/mol over the entire range of the BB local density. In contrast to the benzene self-interactions, the WW pair potentials show significant attractive interactions; many have a typical double-well form. This outer well near 6.5 Å is weakly attractive (∼ −0.4 kcal/mol) and remains similar in magnitude regardless of the presence of LD potentials and parametrization reference. On the other hand, the depth of the inner well increases (to ∼ −0.5 kcal/mol) for the 50 and 90% references without LD potentials. When reoptimized with all LD terms, the inner core converts into a repulsive shoulder for the 90% reference but becomes very attractive (∼ −0.8 kcal/mol) for the 10% solution. The LD-WW potential seems to compensate for these changes: it exhibits attractive behavior around a local density of 4 (ΔULD−WW ≈ −2 kcal/mol) at 10 and 50% reference compositions and becomes the strongest of all four LD potentials for the 90% solution, decreasing by 12 kcal/mol. It is interesting to note that the minimum in the LD potential of the former two cases occurs near a coordination of four, consistent with stabilization of water’s tetrahedral coordination. The BW pair potential is strictly positive but nonetheless contains a high-energy inner minimum within the corerepulsive region at 3 Å and a shallow outer minimum or

recapitulate correct AA properties, no matter how accurate these may be relative to reality; thus, this particular AA reference serves as an instructive model system. It is also worth noting that the AA systems are at concentrations higher than either the experimental or the AA solubility limit, so that the reference solutions are already phase separated. However, because of the small system size, the interfaces encompass a significant fraction of molecules, which allows the references to sample cross-interactions between the demixed species. To study the effect of reference state point on the transferability, CG models are parametrized from 10, 50, and 90% benzene solutions, respectively. All CG pair potentials and BB, BW, and WB LD potentials are developed using cubic Bsplines with 30 knot points, while the LD WW potential uses 60 knots (chosen higher initially to accommodate potentially complex water−water interactions). A cutoff of 10 Å is used for the pair potentials. Outer cutoffs for LD-BB and LD-WW potentials are estimated from the first solvation shell radii of B− B and W−W radial distribution functions, respectively (7.5 Å for B−B and 3.5 Å for W−W), while those for LD-BW and LDWB potentials are computed as the arithmetic average of the above two (5.5 Å). The inner cutoff for all LD potentials is 1 Å less than these. MD simulations of the CG models are carried out in the NVT ensemble using the LAMMPS MD code,64 modified to include local density potentials. We find that the LD-augmented CG systems provide at least a 15-fold speedup over the AA simulations; this might be further increased with optimization of the LD code.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION III.A. CG Force Fields. We parametrize three versions of the six force fields introduced in Table 1, involving distinct atomistic references at compositions of 10, 50, and 90% benzene mole fraction, respectively. Figure 3 compares the

[Page 6]

Figure 4. Transferability of B−W RDF (top panel) and LD distribution (bottom panel) between AA (represented by black dots) and CG models for the different CG force fields in Table 1. CG models for various combinations of these LD potentials are parametrized from reference compositions of 10, 50, and 90% benzene mole fraction (dark framed plot marked “ref”, along the rows). CG models constructed at a particular AA reference are simulated at compositions spanning 10−90% benzene (along the columns), which are used to calculate and compare RDFs and LD distributions with corresponding AA MD simulations at these compositions. The pair + LD-all CG model is nearly quantitatively transferable for both metrics at every composition.

potentials are included. The corresponding optimized interspecies LD potentials depend on reference compositions, but both the LD-BW and LD-WB interactions are relatively small in magnitude. The LD-WB potential is always completely repulsive, increasing up to 1.2 kcal/mol over a short range of the W−B local density. The LD-BW potential is overall the

shoulder near 4.5 Å. The pair distances of these features remain constant across all reference solutions and are agnostic to the inclusion of LD potentials. When parametrized without LD potentials, the inner minimum in the BW pair potential decreases (by ∼0.5 kcal/mol) when moving from the 10 to 90% reference systems, but this variation vanishes when LD

[Page 7]

Figure 5. Composition weighted RMS overlap for (a) pair correlations and (b) local density distributions, between AA systems and CG models parametrized from 10, 50, and 90% reference compositions (along the vertical subpanels). The LD-WW potential is arguably the most important many-body interaction, and CG model transferability is significantly improved when it alone is included. CG models with only pair potentials or with intrabenzene LD potentials have poor transferability. The 50% reference CG model with all LD potentials performs best, being transferable to both more dilute and more concentrated solutions for both structural metrics.

multibody correlations that weaken the role of the LD potential. It may be noted that each LD potential acts at relatively low local density values, corresponding to small changes in local coordination number, before saturating to constant values for larger variations. The LD-BB and LD-WW potentials saturate near 5−6 benzene and water neighbors, respectively, while the LD-BW and LD-WB potentials show variation only largely between zero and two neighbors (except for the LD-BW potential from the 10% solution). These results may suggest that most of the needed multibody correction needed occurs at low local densities, while the optimized pair potentials are able to capture remaining interactions. Indeed, the calculated local density distributions (discussed shortly) show that the biggest corrections occur at low coordination numbers. Interestingly, the unlike LD potentials (LD-BW and LD-WB) have much smaller magnitudes compared to the like-species potentials, perhaps because B−W and W−B interactions are limited to the thin interfaces in the phase separated AA reference solutions. Ultimately, the same-species local density interactions, i.e., LD BB and LD-WW, seem to capture the most important multibody effects in this system. It should be mentioned, however, that the choice of knot density in the cubic B-splines that represent the LD potentials can slightly influence the magnitudes and shapes of all of the LD potentials. In principle, a very large number of knots will approach a limiting form for each LD potential; however, because some of them vary significantly over small ranges of local density, even a relatively dense number of knots may not quite reach this limit. In the present investigation, we use 0.3 Å/knot for the pair splines, 0.66 local density per knot for the BB, BW, and WB potentials, and a finer spline of 0.10 local density per knot for the LD-WW interactions. Even with this

weakest, and manifests both attractive and repulsive forms that seem specific to the inclusion of LD potentials and the particular reference composition. All three pair potentials exhibit either multiple wells or a well-and-shoulder structure, which is commonly seen in CG models that coarse-grain away directional interactions like hydrogen bonds into spherically symmetric interactions.65−67 The balance between the inner and outer wells in the WW interaction is well-known for water and, on the basis of the ratio of these characteristic distances, promotes tetrahedrally enriched liquid-phase correlations.67,68 The shoulder feature in the BB potentials likely also promotes specific geometries that result from the significant size asymmetry and packing due to benzene’s aspect ratio. The addition of LD potentials, which extend only until the first coordination shell of the corresponding types, rather naturally then seems only to modify the inner well or shoulder of the corresponding pair potential. It is instructive to note the possibility of interaction redundancies between the CG pair and LD potentials, which is distinct from redundancies within the set of LD potentials discussed in section II. In particular, if the LD potential is linear in the coordination number, then it can mimic the behavior of a short-range pair potential (i.e., with an energy that scales with the number of nearest neighbors), leading to the possibility that effective interactions might shift between the LD and pair potentials. We see this in the pair + LD-all CG models from the 90% reference solution case, where the WW interactions involve an entirely repulsive pair potential such that all shortrange attractions shift into an almost linear LD WW potential. This may be due to the small number of water molecules in that case and consequently insufficient local crowding and reduced

[Page 8]

Figure 6. Fractional errors between AA and CG predictions of excess chemical potential for inserting a hard sphere with diameters ranging from 0 to 5 Å, for the different CG model force fields per Table 1. CG models are parametrized from reference compositions of 10, 50, and 90% benzene mole fractions (dark framed plot marked “ref” along the rows). Excess chemical potentials are calculated using the Widom test particle insertion method. Including W−W multibody interactions is essential for CG model transferability, as all models without this interaction predict insertion free energies (for R ≥ 1.5 Å) incorrectly modulated by composition.

potentials perform much better and the pair + LD-all CG model is nearly quantitatively transferable to all of the compositions in terms of RDF reproduction. A similar trend emerges in the LD distributions, where the pair-only model shows limited fidelity, even at the reference composition, and grossly overpredicts both the peak and the spread of the distribution at other compositions. Once again, better transferability in the LD distribution results from the inclusion of the LD-WW potential, and the pair + LD-all model scales reasonably well across the entire composition space. Figure 5 summarizes the overlap of all three RDFs and four LD distributions for the different classes of CG force fields across composition space and for different parametrization references. Here we compute the root-mean-square (RMS) differences between the AA and CG versions of these metrics, averaged over the distinct species combinations and weighed by composition

relatively high knot resolution, we still detect some minor challenges in modeling sharp peaks that appear in the LD distributions at low coordination numbers. However, further increases in resolution make the relative entropy minimization more difficult, and thus, we remain with the present parametrization as a balance of accuracy and efficiency. III.B. Structural Transferability. We first evaluate the relative transferabilities of the CG models in Table 1 by comparing structural properties across the entire composition spectrum, beyond the specific compositions at which they are parametrized. We consider the radial distribution functions (RDFs or gαβ(r), where αβ = BB, WW, and BW) as well as the local-density distributions (PLD(ραβ), where αβ = BB, WW, BW, and WB). For the sake of brevity, two examples of structural correlation functions are presented here; the remainder have qualitatively similar behavior and are given in the Supporting Information (Figures S1−S5). Figure 4 shows the transferability of B−W pair correlations and local density distributions across benzene compositions for the different CG model. For the RDFs, all CG models show good representability at the composition at which they were developed, as expected from the relative entropy strategy, which should match pair correlations when finely discretized and flexible spline pair potentials are used.69 At other compositions, the pair-only models fare poorly: the one from 10 and 50% solutions overestimates the RDF peaks at higher compositions, while that developed from the 90% solution underpredicts the RDF peak at 10% composition. The pair + LD-BB and pair + LD-WB models seem equally limited in their ability to capture states beyond the reference composition. On the other hand, the models with LD-WW and LD-BW

RMS[g (r )] = (x B 2⟨ΔgBB 2⟩ + x W 2⟨Δg WW 2⟩ + 2x Bx W ⟨ΔgBW 2⟩)1/2 RMS[PLD(ρ)] = [x B 2⟨ΔPLD,BB 2⟩ + x W 2⟨ΔPLD,WW 2⟩ + x B 1/2 x W (⟨ΔPLD,BW 2⟩ + ⟨ΔPLD,BW 2⟩)] AA CG 2 ⟨ΔXαβ ⟩ = N ∑ (Xαβ − Xαβ )

where for Xαβ = gαβ(r) or PLD(ραβ) and N numbers the discrete values of the arguments (r or ρ). Figure 5a demonstrates that all of the CG models are accurate in predicting the RDFs at the reference composition at which they are parametrized, but the pair-only and pair + LD5685

[Page 9]

Figure 7. Macroscopic phase separation in large systems and transferability of density profiles of benzene (top panel) and water (bottom panel) at an overall composition of 27.5% benzene mole fraction in a long rectangular box, using the different CG models parametrized from 10, 50, and 90% reference compositions (across the columns). CG models without LD contribution of water (pair-only, pair + LD-BB) underpredict the equilibrium density of benzene and overestimate that of water, with the deviations increasing when the parameterization reference is more extreme in composition. Dotted lines are the experimental bulk densities of benzene (top panel: ∼0.89 g/cm3) and water (bottom panel: ∼1.0 g/cm3).

BB force fields worsen significantly at other compositions. For calibration, a RMS error of 1.2 for the pair-only CG model at 10% composition corresponds to an overprediction of the WW RDF peak by 300% and BW peak by 113%, on average. On the other hand, the pair + LD-WW and pair + LD-all CG models have very low RMS errors across all of composition space. Remarkably, the high transferability of these models is not affected by the reference composition. Particularly for the pair + LD-all case, models parametrized at either very high or low benzene concentrations perform well. The transferabilities in LD distributions in Figure 5b have a similar trend, but the RMS error is nonzero everywhere including the reference composition. This is likely because the absolute RMS metric used in eq 9 is sensitive to the large variation in the range of the (normalized) LD distributions across BB, WW, BW, and WB types, and very high-resolution splines for LD interactions would be needed to capture some sharp features of the LD distributions (which pose numerical challenges in the relative entropy minimization). Figure S6 in the Supporting Information presents an alternate version of Figure 5 where the RMS errors are normalized relative to the AA distribution for both pair and LD. The poor performance of the pair + LD-BB force field and the high transferability of CG models that include the LD-WW potential show that, although the BB and WW LD potentials are comparable in magnitude (as observed in Figure 3), the LD-WW potential is the more important multibody contribution. Admittedly, the reference solutions used in this study are already phase-separated, unlike previous efforts to parametrize benzene−water CG models from much more dilute conditions.52 Intrawater local many-body correlations are likely particularly important to hydrophobic-mediated interactions and phase separated conditions, which we believe underlie the success of the LD-WW potential.

It should be mentioned that it is not clear if the LD strategy improves the structural transferability of the CG models across bulk density (or pressure). Figure S7 in the Supporting Information shows that LD potentials sometimes improve reproduction of pair correlation functions at slightly higher or lower densities, compared to pair-only models, but the effect is not uniform. III.C. Thermodynamic Transferability. We also consider the extent to which the CG models reproduce selected thermodynamic properties in addition to structural correlation functions. As a first example, we calculate the excess chemical potential due to inserting a hard sphere of radius R in benzene solutions of composition 10−90%, μex(R). Since a hard sphere interacts simply by excluding other particles within a threshold volume, μex(R) = −kBT ln Pcav is calculated from the probability of finding a cavity of radius R in the equilibrium solution within the simulation box. For pure solvents, the hard sphere solvation chemical potential is directly related to the equilibrium fluctuations in local density of the solvent around solutes, which is an important measure of solute hydrophobicity in aqueous solutions.70 In this case, we introduce hard spheres within the entire aqueous benzene solution and thus the resulting excess chemical potential is related to the speciesaveraged density fluctuations. Figure 6 compares the fractional error between AA and CG

(

μ ex

)

, for the different CG predictions of μex(R), i.e., 1 − μCG ex AA

models. Direct comparison between AA and CG excess chemical potentials can be found in the Supporting Information (Figure S8). The AA and CG predictions match nearly exactly for hard spheres of radius ≤1.5 Å for all force fields. For R ≥ 1.5 Å, the pair + LD-WW and pair + LD-all models produce ∼10− 15% deviation from the AA predictions at the reference compositions. This error is magnified at compositions away

[Page 10]

replicate the sharp segregation along the interface seen in the AA system, and leads to a longer benzene phase and a slight nonzero concentration of benzene in the water phase. It is worth noting that this particular model displayed a significantly different character in the water−water pair and LD potentials, as shown in Figure 3. It may be difficult for this model to capture the sharp local density gradients across the phase interface. The behavior of the benzene−water interface can be further quantified by calculating the interfacial surface tension (γ), calculated by the Kirkwood−Buff formula73

from the reference for the 10 and 50% reference solutions but interestingly decreases to 8% when the pair + LD-all force field from the 90% reference is used at lower compositions. The pair-only, pair + LD-BB, pair + LD-BW, and pair + LD-WB force fields have higher error (∼20−30%) regardless of the ex composition. In most cases, μex CG ≤ μAA, as can be intuitively expected, since coarse-graining multiple atoms into single, isotropic CG point molecules opens more effective free volume in the solution. However, the pair-only model from the 50% reference and several models from the 90% reference predict ex ex positive errors, i.e., μCG > μAA , when applied to lower compositions. It is well-known from scaled-particle theory that μex for a hard sphere solute of radius R is related to the solute contact density71,72 d ex 4π 2 μ (R ) = R [ρsolvent G(R )] dR

∞

γ=

⎛

p +p ⎞

∫−∞ dz⎜⎝pzz − xx 2 yy ⎟⎠

where pii is the diagonal component of the pressure tensor along the i axis (i = x, y, z) and ±∞ represents the benzene and water bulk phases. Our AA simulations and most of the CG models reveal two nearly sharp planar interfaces (as shown in Figure 7) so that the difference between the pressure normal to

where G(R) is the first-peak value of the hard-particle−solvent RDF. Although this result strictly holds for pure solvents, it remains conceptually similar for liquid mixtures.71 Therefore, hydrocarbon solvents, with typically lower contact densities for hard-particle solutes, are expected to exhibit smaller excess chemical potentials.72 For most of the benzene solutions upward of 50% composition, it is likely that cavity volumes are much more frequent in the benzene phase, thus decreasing the free energy of insertion. CG force fields that do not include W−W multibody interactions (namely, pair-only, pair + LDBB, pair + LD-BW, and pair + LD-WB) are sensitive to the system composition: when parametrized from the 10% reference and transferred to higher benzene compositions, they predict lower μex, and when constructed from the 90% reference and transferred to dilute solutions, they produce systematically higher μex. Thus, it appears that capturing W−W self-interactions accurately is crucial to model transferability. To investigate the macroscopic phase separation between benzene and water and the associated equilibrium interfacial behavior, we perform MD simulations with 380 benzene and 1000 water molecules in a periodic box that is extended (∼129 Å) along the z axis. The volume of this system is nearly 5 times larger than those of the parametrization references. The solution composition was chosen such that the equilibrium box volume determined through an initial (40 ns) NPT simulation produces an overall concentration of ∼7 M, which is close to the highest concentration limit (∼9.5 M) at which paironly CG models studied in ref 52 fail to capture the macroscopic phase separation. Bulk density profiles are subsequently computed from sampling equilibrated trajectories (∼60 ns) in the constant volume NVT ensemble, along the z direction. Figure 7 compares the bulk density profiles of benzene and water for the different CG models from the 10, 50, and 90% reference compositions. The AA system and all of the CG models demonstrate macroscopic phase segregation in which the benzene and water phases move to opposite sides of the box along the longest dimension. The pair-only, pair + LD-BB, pair + LD-BW, and pair + LD-WB models systematically predict up to 10% lower bulk densities for benzene and up to 40% higher ones for water, when parametrized from the 90% solution. Consequently, these force fields also produce a larger size of the benzene phase. While CG models that include the LD-WW potential reproduce the bulk densities nearly correctly, the pair + LD-all model from the 90% reference does not

the interface (pzz) and the total tangential pressure

(

pxx + pyy

) is

nearly zero everywhere except the interface, and pzz remains roughly constant along the z axis. For a finite box of length Lz in the z direction, the discrete version of eq 11 gives the interfacial tension (averaged over two interfaces due to periodic boundary conditions) as74−76 γ=

⟨p ⟩ + ⟨pyy ⟩ ⎞ Lz ⎛ ⎟ ⎜⟨p ⟩ − xx ⎟ 2 ⎜⎝ zz ⎠

where ⟨ ⟩ denotes spatial averages along the z coordinate. Equations 11 and 12 can be sensitive to the cutoff for truncating pair potentials.77 We perform AA simulations with nonbonded pair cutoffs of 10, 11, and 12 Å, and find that the interfacial tension does not change within statistical certainty between the last two cutoffs, with a value of 43.7 mN/m at 12 Å. Figure 8 compares the AA surface tension with that of the different CG models in Table 1 and from the three parametrization references. The AA surface tension is ∼43.7 mN/m which overestimates by 36% the experimental value (32 mN/m);78 this deviation is likely due to the overprediction of the solubility of benzene in water by the GROMOS 53a6 AA force field, as discussed in section II.B. However, we note that our focus here is the ability of the CG models to capture the given reference, regardless of their absolute accuracy. All CG models in Figure 8 embed significant transferability errors such that predicted γ values systematically increase from low to high benzene concentrations. The absolute errors in the interfacial tension are lowest for the 50% reference solution; under these conditions, the pair-only and pair + LD-WW models come closest to matching the AA value, underestimating it by 1%. CG models from the 10 and 90% references give values off by approximately 37 and 175%, respectively. It should be noted that the pressure tensor components for calculating the surface tension are obtained from constant volume (NVT) CG MD simulations (box dimensions are taken from the equilibrated AA simulation). We verified that the ensemble averaged pressure has no correlation with the surface tension, so that the differences in γ values are due to differences in the CG force fields and not differences in state.

[Page 11]

4500 and 7000 atm with a 3% average (RMS) fluctuation from the mean. This is not terribly surprising, as bottom-up CG models are well-known to have difficulty capturing correct pressure, as has been explored in a number of papers.24,29,30,79−82 Das and Andersen83 and more recently Noid and co-workers44,84 have suggested that, to predict the pressure correctly, CG models might incorporate additional volume-dependent terms in the interaction potential; by then sampling AA simulations under constant pressure conditions, where volume fluctuates, the CG volume-dependent energy term can be parametrized in a bottom-up fashion. As a further investigation of thermodynamic properties of the liquid mixtures, we consider Kirkwood−Buff integrals. The theory of solutions pioneered by Kirkwood and Buff and later worked out in detail by Ben-Naim provides an important link between microscopic structure and macroscopic thermodynamic observables of solutions.85,86 The central elements of Kirkwood−Buff (KB) theory are integrals that depend on the RDFs as

Figure 8. Comparison of benzene−water interfacial tension between the AA system and the different CG models from 10, 50, and 90% reference solutions, for a 27.5% benzene solution in a long rectangular box. The AA system overpredicts the experimental surface tension (∼32 mN/m) of the benzene−water interface,78 but regardless of its absolute accuracy, all CG models embed different amounts of transferability errors relative to it. The pair-only and pair + LD-WW models parametrized from the 50% solution come closest to reproducing the AA surface tension. CG models from more concentrated reference solutions predict increasingly high surface tensions.

Gαβ (R ) =

∫0 dr 4πr 2[gαβ(r) − 1]

where gαβ(r) is the RDF between species α and β (αβ = BB, WW, BW) and R is a correlation distance beyond which the RDF becomes flat and the integrand in eq 13 vanishes. The Kirkwood−Buff integral (KBI) is related to the excess coordination number around a particle relative to a flat density profile. Thus, a positive value of Gαβ signifies a higher propensity of molecule type β around α (within a correlation radius of R), whereas a negative value indicates low

Although the differences in bulk density profiles predicted by the LD-augmented CG models are small, they perform poorly in reproducing the thermodynamic pressure and consequently the interfacial tension. The average CG pressure varies between

Figure 9. Comparison of the Kirkwood−Buff integrals (KBIs) of types B−B, W−W, and B−W (along the vertical subpanels) shown as a function of correlation length between AA and CG models for a very dilute solution at 0.2% mole fraction of benzene (left panel) and a superconcentrated solution at 99.8% (right panel). The CG models are parametrized from a 50% reference solution. All CG models have poor transferability for the BB KBI at dilute composition and for the WW KBI at very high composition. CG models with all LD potentials come closest to reproducing the WW and BW KBIs at low composition.

[Page 12]

Table 2. Comparison of the Values of the KBIs (Averaged over Correlation Lengths in the Interval 14−18 Å for the 0.2% Solution and 35−40 Å for the 99.8% Solution) between the AA System, Pair-Only, and Pair + LD-All CG Modelsa

xB

force field type

GBB (Å3)

GWW (Å3)

GBW (Å3)

0.002 0.002 0.002 0.998 0.998 0.998

AA pair-only pair + LD-all AA pair-only pair + LD-all

305 ± 66 102100 ± 2400* 179 ± 14 −97.55 ± 0.17 −93.92 ± 0.17 −86.92 ± 0.26

−23.96 ± 0.02 −8.12 ± 0.29 −23.55 ± 0.03 2000 ± 1100* −4600 ± 1200* 4050 ± 620*

−124.58 ± 0.85 −1310 ± 25 −122.5 ± 1.1 −24.0 ± 3.3* −32.3 ± 2.1* −209.8 ± 2.7*

Values marked with an asterisk (*) have not converged.

also perform worse. The pair + LD-all force field comes closest to predicting all three KBIs, reproducing the converged values to within 41, 1.8, and 1.6% accuracy, for BB, WW, and BW, respectively. On the other hand, for the 99.8% solution, the BB KBI barely converges and is captured similarly by all of the CG models. Both the WW and BW KBIs do not converge for this case. KBI values for the AA, pair-only, and pair + LD-all models, averaged over the correlation length for the different CG force fields, are compared in Table 2. The BB KBIs for all of the CG models at 0.2% mole fraction have high positive values pointing toward higher benzene aggregation at very dilute benzene composition than predicted by the AA model. This is likely due to transferability errors stemming from the choice of the parametrization reference of 50% mole fraction, which is significantly more concentrated than the phase separation point of the system (xB = 0.0095, as predicted by the AA force field55). It should be kept in mind that converged KBIs calculated according to eq 13 are highly sensitive to small variations in the RDFs, especially over the correlation lengths that are chosen to report the average converged value. While Figure 5 shows that the transferability errors for RDFs using local density-assisted force fields are low, it may be that such small variations are more difficult to capture quantitatively through the approach used here, and additional constraints may be useful to help optimize CG models to correctly predict the KBIs.90 Arguably, this test of transferability is somewhat extreme because it attempts to bridge both sides of the phase transition. Previous studies of this system have sought the opposite route, i.e., constructing CG models at very dilute compositions and observing their transferability to extremely high concentrations.52 Intra- and interspecies many-body effects are typically absent in dilute solutions, so perhaps mean-field approaches like the LD potential necessitate the use of a reference AA composition that is concentrated enough to demonstrate sufficient multiparticle interactions through macroscopic aggregation and/or consequent phase separation behavior.

intermolecular affinity. Solute−solute, solute−solvent, and solvent−solvent KBIs can be additively combined into a preferential solvation parameter Δ = G BB + G WW − 2G BW

which quantifies the mutual affinity between the solute and solvent and provides a gateway between microscopic structure and macroscopic thermodynamic properties through its connection to chemical potentials and activity coefficients. In particular, the composition derivatives of the benzene chemical potential (μB) and activity coefficient (γB) at temperature T and pressure P, for a solution with benzene and water concentrations (in M) ρB, ρW and mole fractions xB, xW, respectively, follow ⎛ ∂μB ⎞ ⎜ ⎟ = [βx B(1 + ρW x BΔBW )]−1 ⎝ ∂x B ⎠ P , T

and ⎛ ∂ ln γB ⎞ ρW x BΔBW ⎜ ⎟ =− 1 + ρW x BΔBW ⎝ ∂ ln x B ⎠ P , T

It should be noted that, for small values of r and/or small system size, the RDFs are insufficiently sampled at low interparticle distances, which can lead to convergence issues in KBIs and impart oscillatory character to these integrals when considered as a function of R. The convergence properties of KBIs and corrections to adapt them for small system sizes have been of interest in the recent literature and have been studied by van der Vegt and co-workers87,88 and Schnell and coworkers.89 We evaluate the transferability of KBIs calculated using CG models developed from the 50% benzene solution, under extreme composition conditions at 0.2 and 99.8% benzene mole fraction that lie outside of the phase separation envelope. It should be noted that eq 13 is exact only for MD simulations in the grand canonical ensemble, and holds approximately for closed systems in a manner that becomes increasingly accurate with larger system sizes. Therefore, we carry out atomistic simulations with 5000 molecules and larger equilibrium cubic box dimensions (≈53 Å for the 0.2% solution and 89 Å for the 99.8% solution). Figure 9 compares the B−B, W−W, and B−W types of KBIs as a function of the correlation length from among the CG models of Table 1 for xB = 0.002 (left panel) and xB = 0.998 (right panel). In the 0.2% solution, the BB KBI fails to converge at large R for the pair-only CG model, and when LD potentials are used, it converges on values that are different from the AA system (black line). For the WW and BW KBIs, CG models with only pair potentials and/or lacking the LD-WW potential

■

CONCLUSIONS In this work, we used local density (LD) potentials as a simple and computationally inexpensive way to develop transferable CG models of molecular liquid solutions and hence their equilibrium phase behavior. Specifically, we used relative entropy minimization to develop CG models of aqueous benzene solutions that map benzene (B) and water (W) molecules to single CG sites, thus coarse-graining away orientational degrees of freedom that heavily mediate the unique geometric and hydrogen bonded interactions governing liquid phase properties. We explored the ability of LD potentials to capture the multibody impact of these interactions and their mediation by the local solution environment. In

[Page 13]

that these might be combined in arbitrary mixtures to create transferable force fields; we leave this idea for future directions. However, one surprising result was the significant variation in the form of the LD potentials determined at distinct reference compositions, even though each model still showed excellent transferability in structural properties across composition (particularly for the LD-all case). Perhaps even with LD potentials, the CG force field still admits some flexibility that could be adjusted to target reproduction of other properties, for example, those relevant to solvation thermodynamics. In a previous work, we used a single type of LD potential between CG monomers of a superhydrophobic polymer to construct implicit-water solvent models that led to a muchimproved description of the conformational space sampled by the polymer.41 Hydrophobic polymer collapse and benzene clustering in water both share common themes of higher-order cooperativity inherent to hydrophobic interactions, which can be modulated by the size asymmetry of the involved species.51 It seems that, by accounting for local structure, even if simply in terms of coordination numbers without explicitly including orientational degrees of freedom, LD potentials can capture the delicate balance between entropy-driven hydrophobic forces around small solutes and enthalpy-driven hydrophobic interactions around large macromolecules and macroscopic interfaces. Thus, the corrective effect of the LD potential over traditional CG pair interaction may be broadly useful for improving a wide variety of CG models of fluid phase physics characterized by short ranged forces. In turn, the use of CG models may significantly enable the application of rigorous Monte Carlo phase equilibrium calculations5,8 that involve insertion and deletion moves. While the minimal set of LD potentials needed for good transferability in a CG model may be difficult to predict a priori, it is useful to note that water is a very common solvent and retaining its local structural correlations in CG models is arguably important for a large class of fluid mixtures.

combination with three CG pair potentials (BB, WW, BW), we tested the relative roles of the four possible LD potentials (BB, WW, BW, WB) by combining them zero, one, and all at a time, and we evaluated the sensitivity of the models to different reference all-atom system compositions spanning low to high benzene mole fractions. Here, the relative entropy minimization strategy provided a straightforward and simple way to parametrize both the conventional pair interactions and the more novel local-density potentials, all modeled by flexible splines. Our results show that CG models built entirely out of pair potentials have limited transferability and poorly reproduce structural and thermodynamic properties at compositions far from the parametrization conditions. On the other hand, we find that CG models including LD potentials show improved structural transferability, in some cases dramatically so: including all four LD interactions allows quantitative reproduction of radial distribution functions and coordination number distributions across all of the composition space. Of the different LD potentials, the LD-BB interaction appears the least important to improving transferability, while the LD-WW potential has the strongest effect, suggesting that water−water interactions comprise the dominant multibody force in the system. This highlights the role of water’s unique structural correlations and its tetrahedral hydrogen bonded network31,67,91 in mediating its interactions with other water molecules as well as hydrophobic interactions with the much larger benzene molecule. Ultimately, the unlike LD potentials have an important role too in characterizing the B−W segregation under phase separated conditions, so that the CG force field including all four LD potentials is always the most transferable in terms of both structure and thermodynamics, regardless of the AA reference. In terms of other thermodynamic properties, we also found that the LD strategy improved macroscopic simulations of phase separations, allowing individual phases to equilibrate at correct bulk compositions. However, even with the LD strategy, CG models produced more diffuse benzene−water interfaces than expected from all-atom results, likely due to the significant gradients in local composition that are not addressed by LD potentials. All CG models showed difficulty in capturing correct bulk pressures and interfacial tensions, likely connected to the difficulty in resolving the interfacial profile but also to the wellknown problem of recapitulating pressure with bottom-up CG models.24,29,30,79−82 Moreover, we found that the LD strategy generally improved the ability of CG models to capture Kirkwood−Buff integrals at very dilute compositions, although no one model was able to completely reproduce the corresponding AA results. This work illustrates a proof of principle for using LD potentials in bottom-up CG models capable of improving transferability and thus capturing phase separated systems. It is interesting to note that all models were developed from relatively small reference systems, yet translated well to largerscale simulations. Indeed, here the small system size magnified the effect of interfacial and cross-species interactions, which provided sampling of local composition fluctuations important for model parametrization by relative entropy minimization. The determined forms of the local density interactions were also informative: the self-LD interactions (LD-BB, LD-WW) showed the most significant energy variations and impact. This may suggest the possibility of tabulating self LD interactions for different species independent of any particular mixture, such

■

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

S Supporting Information *

The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.7b12446. A detailed comparison of radial distribution functions and local density distributions for different force fields and reference compositions (PDF)

■

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

*E-mail: shell@engineering.ucsb.edu. ORCID

M. Scott Shell: 0000-0002-0439-1534 Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

■

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (Award No. CHEM-1300770). We gratefully acknowledge the help from Prof. Dr. Christine Peter at the Department of Chemistry, Universitat Konstanz, for sharing important information about the GROMACS implementation of the atomistic systems. We are also grateful to Prof. Dr. Nico van der Vegt and David Rosenberger, of the Department of

[Page 14]

Disrupts Phase Separation, Aggregation, and Toxicity. EMBO J. 2017, 36 (20), 2951−2967. (22) Noid, W. G. Perspective: Coarse-Grained Models for Biomolecular Systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 139 (9), 090901. (23) Lyubartsev, A. P.; Laaksonen, A. Calculation of Effective Interaction Potentials from Radial Distribution Functions: A Reverse Monte Carlo Approach. Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top. 1995, 52 (4), 3730−3737. (24) Reith, D.; Pütz, M.; Müller-Plathe, F. Deriving Effective Mesoscale Potentials from Atomistic Simulations. J. Comput. Chem. 2003, 24 (13), 1624−1636. (25) Noid, W. G.; Chu, J.-W.; Ayton, G. S.; Krishna, V.; Izvekov, S.; Voth, G. A.; Das, A.; Andersen, H. C. The Multiscale Coarse-Graining Method. I. A Rigorous Bridge between Atomistic and Coarse-Grained Models. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128 (24), 244114. (26) Shell, M. S. The Relative Entropy Is Fundamental to Multiscale and Inverse Thermodynamic Problems. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 129 (14), (27) Brini, E.; Algaer, E. A.; Ganguly, P.; Li, C.; Rodríguez-Ropero, F.; Vegt, N. F. A. van der. Systematic Coarse-Graining Methods for Soft Matter Simulations − a Review. Soft Matter 2013, 9 (7), 2108− (28) Rudzinski, J. F.; Noid, W. G. A Generalized-Yvon-Born-Green Method for Coarse-Grained Modeling. Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top. 2015, 224 (12), 2193−2216. (29) Louis, A. A. Beware of Density Dependent Pair Potentials. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 2002, 14 (40), 9187. (30) Johnson, M. E.; Head-Gordon, T.; Louis, A. A. Representability Problems for Coarse-Grained Water Potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2007, 126 (14), 144509. (31) Molinero, V.; Moore, E. B. Water Modeled As an Intermediate Element between Carbon and Silicon†. J. Phys. Chem. B 2009, 113 (13), 4008−4016. (32) Larini, L.; Lu, L.; Voth, G. A. The Multiscale Coarse-Graining Method. VI. Implementation of Three-Body Coarse-Grained Potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132 (16), 164107. (33) Das, A.; Andersen, H. C. The Multiscale Coarse-Graining Method. IX. A General Method for Construction of Three Body Coarse-Grained Force Fields. J. Chem. Phys. 2012, 136 (19), 194114. (34) Allen, E. C.; Rutledge, G. C. A Novel Algorithm for Creating Coarse-Grained, Density Dependent Implicit Solvent Models. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128 (15), 154115. (35) Allen, E. C.; Rutledge, G. C. Evaluating the Transferability of Coarse-Grained, Density-Dependent Implicit Solvent Models to Mixtures and Chains. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 130 (3), 034904. (36) Izvekov, S.; Chung, P. W.; Rice, B. M. Particle-Based Multiscale Coarse Graining with Density-Dependent Potentials: Application to Molecular Crystals (Hexahydro-1,3,5-Trinitro-s-Triazine). J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 135 (4), 044112. (37) Moore, J. D.; Barnes, B. C.; Izvekov, S.; Lísal, M.; Sellers, M. S.; Taylor, D. E.; Brennan, J. K. A Coarse-Grain Force Field for RDX: Density Dependent and Energy Conserving. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144 (10), 104501. (38) Dama, J. F.; Jin, J.; Voth, G. A. The Theory of Ultra-CoarseGraining. 3. Coarse-Grained Sites with Rapid Local Equilibrium of Internal States. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017, 13 (3), 1010−1022. (39) Dunn, N. J. H.; Noid, W. G. Bottom-up Coarse-Grained Models with Predictive Accuracy and Transferability for Both Structural and Thermodynamic Properties of Heptane-Toluene Mixtures. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144 (20), 204124. (40) Daw, M. S.; Foiles, S. M.; Baskes, M. I. The Embedded-Atom Method: A Review of Theory and Applications. Mater. Sci. Rep. 1993, 9 (7−8), 251−310. (41) Sanyal, T.; Shell, M. S. Coarse-Grained Models Using LocalDensity Potentials Optimized with the Relative Entropy: Application to Implicit Solvation. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 145 (3), 034109. (42) Allen, E. C.; Rutledge, G. C. Coarse-Grained, Density Dependent Implicit Solvent Model Reliably Reproduces Behavior of a Model Surfactant System. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 130 (20), 204903.

Computational and Physical Chemistry, T.U. Darmstadt, for helpful comments and insight.

■

REFERENCES

(1) Gubbins, K. E. Molecular Simulation: Phase Equilibria and Confined Systems. Scientific Computing in Chemical Engineering II; Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999; pp 2−11. (2) de Pablo, J. J.; Yan, Q.; Escobedo, F. A. Simulation of Phase Transitions in Fluids. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 1999, 50, 377−411. (3) Chipot, C.; Pohorille, A. Free Energy Calculations: Theory and Applications in Chemistry and Biology; Springer: Berlin, 2007. (4) Pietrucci, F. Strategies for the Exploration of Free Energy Landscapes: Unity in Diversity and Challenges Ahead. Rev. Phys. 2017, 2, 32−45. (5) Panagiotopoulos, A. Z. Direct Determination of Phase Coexistence Properties of Fluids by Monte Carlo Simulation in a New Ensemble. Mol. Phys. 1987, 61 (4), 813−826. (6) Ferrenberg, A. M.; Swendsen, R. H. New Monte Carlo Technique for Studying Phase Transitions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1988, 61 (23), 2635−2638. (7) Ferrenberg, A. M.; Swendsen, R. H. Optimized Monte Carlo Data Analysis. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1989, 63 (12), 1195−1198. (8) Errington, J. R. Direct Calculation of Liquid−vapor Phase Equilibria from Transition Matrix Monte Carlo Simulation. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 118 (22), 9915−9925. (9) Shelley, J. C.; Shelley, M. Y.; Reeder, R. C.; Bandyopadhyay, S.; Klein, M. L. A Coarse Grain Model for Phospholipid Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2001, 105 (19), 4464−4470. (10) Shih, A. Y.; Freddolino, P. L.; Arkhipov, A.; Schulten, K. Assembly of Lipoprotein Particles Revealed by Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Struct. Biol. 2007, 157 (3), 579− (11) Lyubartsev, A. P.; Rabinovich, A. L. Recent Development in Computer Simulations of Lipid Bilayers. Soft Matter 2011, 7 (1), 25− (12) Rodgers, J. M.; Sørensen, J.; de Meyer, F. J.-M.; Schiøtt, B.; Smit, B. Understanding the Phase Behavior of Coarse-Grained Model Lipid Bilayers through Computational Calorimetry. J. Phys. Chem. B 2012, 116 (5), 1551−1569. (13) Marrink, S. J.; de Vries, A. H.; Mark, A. E. Coarse Grained Model for Semiquantitative Lipid Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2004, 108 (2), 750−760. (14) Dill, K. A.; Bromberg, S.; Yue, K.; Chan, H. S.; Ftebig, K. M.; Yee, D. P.; Thomas, P. D. Principles of Protein Folding  A Perspective from Simple Exact Models. Protein Sci. 1995, 4 (4), 561− (15) Tøstesen, E.; Chen, S.-J.; Dill, K. A. RNA Folding Transitions and Cooperativity. J. Phys. Chem. B 2001, 105 (8), 1618−1630. (16) Shen, V. K.; Cheung, J. K.; Errington, J. R.; Truskett, T. M. Coarse-Grained Strategy for Modeling Protein Stability in Concentrated Solutions. II: Phase Behavior. Biophys. J. 2006, 90 (6), 1949− (17) Wang, Y.; Voth, G. A. Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Polyglutamine Aggregation Using Solvent-Free Multiscale CoarseGrained Models. J. Phys. Chem. B 2010, 114 (26), 8735−8743. (18) Ruff, K. M.; Khan, S. J.; Pappu, R. V. A Coarse-Grained Model for Polyglutamine Aggregation Modulated by Amphipathic Flanking Sequences. Biophys. J. 2014, 107 (5), 1226−1235. (19) Rudzinski, J. F.; Noid, W. G. Bottom-Up Coarse-Graining of Peptide Ensembles and Helix−Coil Transitions. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2015, 11 (3), 1278−1291. (20) Harmon, T. S.; Holehouse, A. S.; Rosen, M. K.; Pappu, R. V. Intrinsically Disordered Linkers Determine the Interplay between Phase Separation and Gelation in Multivalent Proteins. bioRxiv 2017, (21) Monahan, Z.; Ryan, V. H.; Janke, A. M.; Burke, K. A.; Rhoads, S. N.; Zerze, G. H.; O’Meally, R.; Dignon, G. L.; Conicella, A. E.; Zheng, W.; et al. Phosphorylation of the FUS Low-complexity Domain

[Page 15]

(43) Wagner, J. W.; Dannenhoffer-Lafage, T.; Jin, J.; Voth, G. A. Extending the Range and Physical Accuracy of Coarse-Grained Models: Order Parameter Dependent Interactions. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 147 (4), 044113. (44) DeLyser, M. R.; Noid, W. G. Extending Pressure-Matching to Inhomogeneous Systems via Local-Density Potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 147 (13), 134111. (45) Carmichael, S. P.; Shell, M. S. A New Multiscale Algorithm and Its Application to Coarse-Grained Peptide Models for Self-Assembly. J. Phys. Chem. B 2012, 116 (29), 8383−8393. (46) Laaksonen, A.; Stilbs, P.; Wasylishen, R. E. Molecular Motion and Solvation of Benzene in Water, Carbon Tetrachloride, Carbon Disulfide and Benzene: A Combined Molecular Dynamics Simulation and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Study. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 108 (2), 455−468. (47) Linse, P. Molecular Dynamics Simulation of a Dilute Aqueous Solution of Benzene. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1990, 112 (5), 1744−1750. (48) Dang, L. X.; Feller, D. Molecular Dynamics Study of Water− Benzene Interactions at the Liquid/Vapor Interface of Water. J. Phys. Chem. B 2000, 104 (18), 4403−4407. (49) Czaplewski, C.; Rodziewicz-Motowidlo, S.; Liwo, A.; Ripoll, D. R.; Wawak, R. J.; Scheraga, H. A. Molecular Simulation Study of Cooperativity in Hydrophobic Association. Protein Sci. 2000, 9 (06), 1235−1245. (50) Shimizu, S.; Chan, H. S. Anti-Cooperativity and Cooperativity in Hydrophobic Interactions: Three-Body Free Energy Landscapes and Comparison with Implicit-Solvent Potential Functions for Proteins. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2002, 48 (1), 15−30. (51) Chandler, D. Interfaces and the Driving Force of Hydrophobic Assembly. Nature 2005, 437 (7059), 640−647. (52) Villa, A.; Peter, C.; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Transferability of Nonbonded Interaction Potentials for Coarse-Grained Simulations: Benzene in Water. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2010, 6 (8), 2434−2444. (53) Berendsen, H. J. C.; van der Spoel, D.; van Drunen, R. GROMACS: A Message-Passing Parallel Molecular Dynamics Implementation. Comput. Phys. Commun. 1995, 91 (1), 43−56. (54) Hess, B.; Kutzner, C.; van der Spoel, D.; Lindahl, E. GROMACS 4: Algorithms for Highly Efficient, Load-Balanced, and Scalable Molecular Simulation. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2008, 4 (3), 435−447. (55) Oostenbrink, C.; Villa, A.; Mark, A. E.; Van Gunsteren, W. F. A Biomolecular Force Field Based on the Free Enthalpy of Hydration and Solvation: The GROMOS Force-Field Parameter Sets 53A5 and 53A6. J. Comput. Chem. 2004, 25 (13), 1656−1676. (56) Berendsen, H. J. C.; Grigera, J. R.; Straatsma, T. P. The Missing Term in Effective Pair Potentials. J. Phys. Chem. 1987, 91 (24), 6269− (57) Hess, B.; Bekker, H.; Berendsen, H. J. C.; Fraaije, J. G. E. M. LINCS: A Linear Constraint Solver for Molecular Simulations. J. Comput. Chem. 1997, 18 (12), 1463−1472. (58) Hess, B. P-LINCS: A Parallel Linear Constraint Solver for Molecular Simulation. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2008, 4 (1), 116−122. (59) Parrinello, M.; Rahman, A. Polymorphic Transitions in Single Crystals: A New Molecular Dynamics Method. J. Appl. Phys. 1981, 52 (12), 7182−7190. (60) Nosé, S. A. Unified Formulation of the Constant Temperature Molecular Dynamics Methods. J. Chem. Phys. 1984, 81 (1), 511−519. (61) Hoover, W. G. Canonical Dynamics: Equilibrium Phase-Space Distributions. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 1985, 31 (3), 1695− (62) Lide, D. R. CRC handbook of chemistry and physics, 89th ed.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, 2008. (63) Schravendijk, P.; van der Vegt, N. F. A. From Hydrophobic to Hydrophilic Solvation: An Application to Hydration of Benzene. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2005, 1 (4), 643−652. (64) Plimpton, S. Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics. J. Comput. Phys. 1995, 117 (1), 1−19. (65) Stillinger, F. H.; Head-Gordon, T. Perturbational View of Inherent Structures in Water. Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top. 1993, 47 (4), 2484−2490.

(66) Yan, Z.; Buldyrev, S. V.; Kumar, P.; Giovambattista, N.; Debenedetti, P. G.; Stanley, H. E. Structure of the First- and SecondNeighbor Shells of Simulated Water: Quantitative Relation to Translational and Orientational Order. Phys. Rev. E 2007, 76 (5), (67) Chaimovich, A.; Shell, M. S. Anomalous Waterlike Behavior in Spherically-Symmetric Water Models Optimized with the Relative Entropy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2009, 11 (12), 1901−1915. (68) Chaimovich, A.; Shell, M. S. Tetrahedrality and Structural Order for Hydrophobic Interactions in a Coarse-Grained Water Model. Phys. Rev. E 2014, 89 (2), 022140. (69) Chaimovich, A.; Shell, M. S. Relative Entropy as a Universal Metric for Multiscale Errors. Phys. Rev. E 2010, 81 (6), 060104. (70) Hummer, G.; Garde, S.; García, A. E.; Paulaitis, M. E.; Pratt, L. R. Hydrophobic Effects on a Molecular Scale. J. Phys. Chem. B 1998, 102 (51), 10469−10482. (71) Pohorille, A.; Pratt, L. R. Cavities in Molecular Liquids and the Theory of Hydrophobic Solubilities. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1990, 112 (13), 5066−5074. (72) Pratt, L. R.; Pohorille, A. Theory of Hydrophobicity: Transient Cavities in Molecular Liquids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1992, 89 (7), 2995−2999. (73) Kirkwood, J. G.; Buff, F. P. The Statistical Mechanical Theory of Surface Tension. J. Chem. Phys. 1949, 17 (3), 338−343. (74) Harris, J. G. Liquid-Vapor Interfaces of Alkane Oligomers: Structure and Thermodynamics from Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Chemically Realistic Models. J. Phys. Chem. 1992, 96 (12), 5077−5086. (75) Alejandre, J.; Tildesley, D. J.; Chapela, G. A. Molecular Dynamics Simulation of the Orthobaric Densities and Surface Tension of Water. J. Chem. Phys. 1995, 102 (11), 4574−4583. (76) Gloor, G. J.; Jackson, G.; Blas, F. J.; de Miguel, E. Test-Area Simulation Method for the Direct Determination of the Interfacial Tension of Systems with Continuous or Discontinuous Potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123 (13), 134703. (77) Ghoufi, A.; Malfreyt, P.; Tildesley, D. J. Computer Modelling of the Surface Tension of the Gas−liquid and Liquid−liquid Interface. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2016, 45 (5), 1387−1409. (78) Cupples, H. L. Interfacial Tension by the Ring Method: The Benzene-Water Interface. J. Phys. Colloid Chem. 1947, 51 (6), 1341− (79) Wang, H.; Junghans, C.; Kremer, K. Comparative Atomistic and Coarse-Grained Study of Water: What Do We Lose by CoarseGraining? Eur. Phys. J. E: Soft Matter Biol. Phys. 2009, 28 (2), 221−229. (80) Izvekov, S.; Chung, P. W.; Rice, B. M. The Multiscale CoarseGraining Method: Assessing Its Accuracy and Introducing Density Dependent Coarse-Grain Potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 133 (6), (81) Fu, C.-C.; Kulkarni, P. M.; Scott Shell, M.; Gary Leal, L. A Test of Systematic Coarse-Graining of Molecular Dynamics Simulations: Thermodynamic Properties. J. Chem. Phys. 2012, 137 (16), 164106. (82) Agrawal, V.; Peralta, P.; Li, Y.; Oswald, J. A PressureTransferable Coarse-Grained Potential for Modeling the Shock Hugoniot of Polyethylene. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 145 (10), 104903. (83) Das, A.; Andersen, H. C. The Multiscale Coarse-Graining Method. V. Isothermal-Isobaric Ensemble. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132 (16), 164106. (84) Dunn, N. J. H.; Noid, W. G. Bottom-up Coarse-Grained Models That Accurately Describe the Structure, Pressure, and Compressibility of Molecular Liquids. J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 143 (24), 243148. (85) Kirkwood, J. G. Statistical Mechanics of Fluid Mixtures. J. Chem. Phys. 1935, 3 (5), 300−313. (86) Ben-Naim, A. Molecular Theory of Solutions; Oxford University Press: Oxford, NY, 2006. (87) Ganguly, P.; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Representability and Transferability of Kirkwood−Buff Iterative Boltzmann Inversion Models for Multicomponent Aqueous Systems. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2013, 9 (12), 5247−5256.

[Page 16]

(88) Ganguly, P.; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Convergence of Sampling Kirkwood−Buff Integrals of Aqueous Solutions with Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2013, 9 (3), 1347− (89) Krüger, P.; Schnell, S. K.; Bedeaux, D.; Kjelstrup, S.; Vlugt, T. J. H.; Simon, J.-M. Kirkwood−Buff Integrals for Finite Volumes. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4 (2), 235−238. (90) Ganguly, P.; Mukherji, D.; Junghans, C.; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Kirkwood−Buff Coarse-Grained Force Fields for Aqueous Solutions. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2012, 8 (5), 1802−1807. (91) Brini, E.; Fennell, C. J.; Fernandez-Serra, M.; Hribar-Lee, B.; Lukšič, M.; Dill, K. A. How Water’s Properties Are Encoded in Its Molecular Structure and Energies. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117 (19), 12385−
