[Page 1]

RESEARCH ARTICLE

AND COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY | BIOPHYSICS GENETICS

OPEN ACCESS

Two-way feedback between chromatin compaction and histone modification state explains Saccharomyces cerevisiae heterochromatin bistability Ander Movilla Miangolarraa

, Daniel S. Saxtonb

, Zhi Yanb, Jasper Rineb,1

, and Martin Howarda,1

Edited by Danesh Moazed, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; received February 21, 2024; accepted March 2, 2024

Compact chromatin is closely linked with gene silencing in part by sterically masking access to promoters, inhibiting transcription factor binding and preventing polymerase from efficiently transcribing a gene. However, a broader hypothesis suggests that chromatin compaction can be both a cause and a consequence of the locus histone modification state, with a tight bidirectional interaction underpinning bistable transcriptional states. To rigorously test this hypothesis, we developed a mathematical model for the dynamics of the HMR locus in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, that incorporates activating histone modifications, silencing proteins, and a dynamic, acetylation-dependent, three-dimensional locus size. Chromatin compaction enhances silencer protein binding, which in turn feeds back to remove activating histone modifications, leading to further compaction. The bistable output of the model was in good agreement with prior quantitative data, including switching rates from expressed to silent states (and vice versa), and protein binding/histone modification levels within the locus. We then tested the model by predicting changes in switching rates as the genetic length of the locus was increased, which were then experimentally verified. Such bidirectional feedback between chromatin compaction and the histone modification state may be a widespread and important regulatory mechanism given the hallmarks of many heterochromatic regions: physical chromatin compaction and dimerizing (or multivalent) silencing proteins.

Significance Chromatin is the complex formed by proteins, including histones, and DNA to form chromosomes. Specific chromatin structures and states are thought to be key factors regulating transcription. A common view proposes that histone modifications activate or inhibit transcription either via specific activation or inhibition of RNA polymerase binding/ elongation at a locus, or by expanding/compacting the locus, thereby modulating its accessibility to many macromolecules. In this work, we used theory to investigate a broader hypothesis that chromatin compaction may both inhibit transcription, and feedback via silencing proteins to remove histone modifications that further control chromatin compaction and gene activity. We developed a model incorporating these ideas and showed that it explains quantitative experimental data for a silent locus in budding yeast.

chromatin | gene regulation | mathematical modelling | epigenetics

Although the genome sequence underpins much of the biology of an organism, cells with the same genotype can nevertheless have very different phenotypes, mediated through differential regulation of gene expression. Gene expression is in turn modulated by the multifaceted characteristics of chromatin. For almost a century, chromatin has been broadly divided into euchromatin, open and generally associated with active genes, and heterochromatin, compact and silent (1). Coherent with this vision, the three-dimensional arrangement of chromatin in the vicinity of a gene and the posttranslational modification (PTMs) of the nearby nucleosomes are thought to be major determinants of the strength of transcription. Nevertheless, the relationship between the three-dimensional structure and chromatin modifications has not been elucidated in most cases. In fact, there is lively debate regarding which is the actual transcriptional regulator: whether it is the local density of chromatin (2), histone PTMs present in the locus (3), or the identity of the DNA or nucleosome-bound proteins (4). A common view is that if chromatin is highly compacted, the DNA in this region will be inaccessible and transcriptionally silent (2, 5). Conversely, if the chromatin is less densely packed, then transcription factors can bind, which will be followed by RNA polymerases (6). However, accessibility and transcription are not always correlated (7, 8). Key regulators of chromatin compaction are reader–writer enzymes that bind to nucleosomes only if certain histones PTMs are present and which then catalyze the spread of that same histone PTM to nearby nucleosomes. For example, Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) is activated by H3K27me3 to add further H3K27me3 modifications nearby in a read–write feedback, driving chromatin compaction in vitro (9). Other reader– writer enzymes have also been suggested to be involved in chromatin compaction, such as the SIR complex in budding yeast (10). However, there are alternative regulators of chromatin compaction. Significant evidence points toward acetylation of histone tails, especially H4, as controlling the physical conformation of chromatin (11, 12). These concepts are often presented in a sequential manner, where upstream effectors and downstream consequences are clearly distinguished. Here, however, we investigated a more nuanced connection, where the extent of chromatin compaction is controlled by the absence of histone PTMs, but where the absence of histone PTMs is itself influenced by the extent of chromatin compaction. Indeed, many reader–writer enzymes dimerize

Author contributions: D.S.S., J.R., and M.H. designed research; A.M.M. and Z.Y. performed research; A.M.M. and M.H. analyzed data; and A.M.M., D.S.S., J.R., and M.H. wrote the paper. The authors declare no competing interest. This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).

To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: jrine@berkeley.edu or martin.howard@jic.ac.uk. This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.​ 2403316121/-/DCSupplemental. Published April 9, 2024.

[Page 2]

(e.g., PRC2) and bind to more than one nucleosome at the same time, which makes them very sensitive to the local physical configuration of chromatin. A sufficiently compacted locus would increase the binding of these enzymes and would thereby further influence the histone marks that the enzymes spread or remove. As the presence or absence of histone marks can modulate chromatin conformation, the physical state of the chromatin environment and the histone modification state are inextricably linked in a mutually reinforcing manner. In this work, we investigated this hypothesis via a mathematical model for the Saccharomyces cerevisiae silenced mating-type locus HMR. This locus is constitutively silenced in budding yeast by the action of the Silent Information Regulator (Sir) proteins, which form the Sir complex, and the silencers, which are regulatory sites that recruit Sir proteins. Silencing at HMR does not depend on the identity of the gene encoded by the locus, allowing empirical observation of the transcriptional state of the locus by substituting reporter genes for those genes usually resident at HMR. Under certain conditions that weaken the action of the silencers, the silencing of the locus is rendered bistable, switching between silenced and expressed states. The transcriptional state can be inherited over multiple generations, depending on the strength of silencers, making it an ideal system to study the inheritance of epigenetic information to daughter cells. Capturing its dynamics quantitatively requires an accurate mathematical model, with detailed experimental data available as a strict benchmark for our theory. Here, model outcomes for the HMR locus were successfully tested against both prior experimental data and the results of new experiments specifically designed to test our hypothesis. Overall, our model provided a faithful representation of the biochemical processes involved in epigenetic silencing, enabling us to develop a coherent theory for the feedback between the histone PTM state and chromatin conformation in three-dimensional space. While our modeling refers to the HMR locus in yeast, we believe the bidirectional feedback between the histone PTM state and chromatin conformation could have broader consequences, since the interplay between chromatin compaction, silencing proteins, and histone PTMs seems to be widespread. For example, PRC2 and HP1 are both involved in compaction (13, 14) and transcriptional silencing (3), allowing for the possibility of feedback between the histone PTM state and chromatin conformation, similar to what we propose for HMR. Hence, the ideas developed here could help in elucidating this key relationship in a wide variety of systems. Early theoretical work included minimal models to account for bistability (15) or the spreading of histone marks (16). Subsequent, more detailed modeling studies can be divided into two categories: focused either on a coarse-grained description of large-scale chromatin or on a detailed picture of the regulation at a particular locus. In previous coarse-grained descriptions, a similar bidirectional interaction between epigenetic state and chromatin folding has been considered. However, the molecular mechanisms modeled are often abstract and with limited detail due to the coarse-graining, making quantitative comparisons between the polymer models and experimental data difficult, particularly in the case of system perturbations (17–25). In parallel, single-locus studies have provided much insight into the regulation of certain genetic regions, capturing their dynamics quantitatively, but they have not incorporated links between chromatin folding and the histone PTM state (26–30). In this work, we combined both approaches to produce a model that included this important link and, at the same time, kept an appropriately detailed description of the molecular mechanisms regulating HMR heterochromatin formation, enabling an extensive quantitative comparison with a

wide variety of experimental data. Indeed, analysis of the HMR locus is important as it is one of a small number of loci from any organism where sufficiently detailed molecular data exist to make such an in-depth comparison with theoretical models. Methods Model. Here, we summarize the model constituents and fundamental dynamics (depicted schematically in Fig. 1A; for full details and parameter values, see SI Appendix, sections 1 and 2). Key experimental observations. Intensive study of the budding yeast HMR locus has identified proteins, enzymes, histone PTMs, and regulatory sites involved in silencing/activation (4, 32). Sas2 acetylates H4K16 and Dot1 methylates H3K79, especially if the H3 histone substrate is bound to an H4 histone carrying the H4K16ac mark (33). These two PTMs are associated with active loci. With respect to silencing, HMR is flanked by two silencers (E and I), which are crucial for heterochromatin formation at the locus, as their deletion leads to loss of silencing. The silencers have significant affinity for proteins such as ORC and Rap1 that recruit Sir1 which, in turn, recruits the rest of the Sir complex. If the nucleosome is unmodified, the Sir complex (Sir2-3-4) can bind to it, but in the presence of the H4K16ac or H3K79me3 marks, the Sir complex affinity is greatly reduced (32). Spreading of the Sir complex is then mediated by the read–write action of Sir2, a histone deacetylase whose preferred substrate for the enzymatic reaction is histones acetylated at H4K16, thus increasing the number of binding sites for other Sir proteins by means of its catalytic activity. Notably, binding of the Sir complex to nucleosomes occurs mostly by dimerization, as its affinity increases roughly 50-fold when it binds to two unmodified nucleosomes (34). Importantly, sir1Δ strains are bistable with respect to its transcriptional state at HMR and are able to maintain such a state for multiple generations (35). Thus, in a sir1Δ mutant, HMR is found either in an active state (with high levels of acetylation) or in a silenced state (with low levels of H4K16ac and H3K79me3, but with high levels of the Sir complex bound), switching between the two typically on a timescale of tens of generations (31). The model reflects these essential experimental findings. States and rates. Given that a nucleosome is formed by a histone octamer (two pairs of H2A-H2B histones and another two pairs of H3-H4 histones), we modeled the locus as a set of H3-H4 pairs which can be in five states: Unmodified (U), Unmodified and Sir bound (Ub), Acetylated (H4K16ac, A), Methylated (H3K79me3, M), and Acetylated and Methylated (AM), see Fig. 1A. The two silencers were modeled as preferred binding sites for the Sir complex, which can be thought of as H3-H4 pairs fixed in the U state but with a higher affinity for Sir proteins. For simplicity, and given the insulator role of the boundaries of the HMR locus and the adjacent tRNA gene (36), we considered the locus as isolated from the rest of the genome, and we do not model the rest of the chromosome or any other genetic region. The dynamics of the histone PTMs were modeled mathematically with a reaction rate proportional to the substrate amount (Fig. 1B), i.e., the rate of H4K16 acetylation by Sas2 is kSas2 nu, where nu is the number of unmodified (and not Sir-bound) H3-H4 pairs and kSas2 is a constant reflecting the activity and nuclear concentration of Sas2. Similarly, Dot1 methylation of H3K79 is given by the rate kDot1 na, where na is the number of acetylated H3-H4 pairs, since the most efficient substrate of Dot1 are acetylated H3-H4 pairs (33). We assumed that Sir proteins can bind only to unmodified H3-H4 pairs by a dimerization process, following data from ref. 34. To reflect a compact and dynamic arrangement of the locus, the model does not include the relative positions of the histone pairs, it treats the locus as well-mixed, where contacts between any two H3-H4 pairs are all equally likely. Sir proteins can also dimerize between the two silencers or between a silencer and any unmodified H3-H4 pair, as well as between two unmodified H3-H4 pairs. In a one-dimensional representation of the locus, a silencer would stand at each end of the locus and the nucleosomes would be stacked in between, implying that it would be easier for Sir proteins to dimerize between nearest neighbors. However, this one-dimensional configuration of nucleosomes is not an accurate depiction of reality and the locus is likely to adopt a more dynamic and disordered configuration (37). To reflect this dynamic configuration, we allowed Sir proteins to dimerize between any H3-H4 pair and silencer; but to account for the longer relative length (in the one-dimensional picture) between silencers, and between silencers and H3-H4 pairs (on average), we weighted the

[Page 3]

Sir2 Sas2

unb.

Ub

Dynamic volume model

acetyl methyl SIR

Sir complex binding

Sas2

Sir3

Acvang pathway

acetyl methyl SIR

Silencing pathway

Baseline model

Generaon

Normalised reads

Sas2

bind

H3-H4 number

AM

Sir2

H3-H4 number

Dot1

States

H4K16ac

H3K79me3

Dot1

BC

Sir2 deacet.

Unmod. Nucl. H4K16ac H4K16ac and H3K79me3

Exp. sil. Exp. expr. Model sil. Model expr.

SIR complex

Fig. 1. A model with dynamic volume changes can reproduce the bistable dynamics of HMR in the sir1Δ mutant. Schematic of the model. (A) Possible H3-H4 pair states and transitions in the model. (B) Reaction processes in the model. The Sir complex binds by dimerization to two unmodified H3-H4 pairs and Sir2 deacetylates H4 histones (third nucleosome in the silencing pathway, left column). Sas2 acetylates H4 histones and Dot1 methylates acetylated H3-H4 histone pairs. knn is the reaction constant for the SIR complex binding to two unmodified H3-H4 pairs, nd is the number of H3-H4 histone pairs dimerized by the SIR complex, and kSir2 the reaction constant for Sir2 deacetylation of H4K16. The rest of the symbols are defined in Methods. (C) Example output of a simulation for the sir1Δ mutant. The dynamic volume model (DVM) shows a robust bistable behavior that persists over tens of generations (similar to the phenotype found in experiments), while the baseline model is not bistable. (D) Bimodality Coefficient (BC) for the five different models examined in a two-dimensional parameter sweep (logarithmic scale). In the DVM, Vmax = 1.23 already shows some high BC values but, for added robustness and wider parameter choice, we take the value Vmax = 1.53 which shows higher bimodality while keeping the Rg increase reasonable. (E) Model occupancy fraction of Sir proteins and histone PTMs are compared to experimental ChIP profiles for each of the stable states of the model (silenced [sil.] and expressed [expr.]). Experimental data obtained from ref. 31. ChIP profiles were normalized to their highest peak across the locus to enable quantitative comparison with model occupancy fraction (in Sir3 and H3K79me3, the highest peak is not shown since it corresponds to wild-type or sir4Δ experiments, see ref. 31 for the full dataset). (C–E) Otherwise unspecified parameter values given in SI Appendix, section 1.5.

dimerization probabilities by a factor determined by the genetic length between them. The average genetic distance between any two H3-H4 pairs in the locus is approximately 1/3 of the length of the locus and that between a silencer and any H3-H4 pair is 1/2 of the length of the locus. Thus, a weight of 2/3 was applied to the histone pair-silencer binding constant with respect to the histone pair-histone pair constant, in a way that makes these constants inversely proportional to the distances. Analogously, a factor of 1/3 was applied to the silencer-silencer binding constant (see SI Appendix, section 1.1 for the explicit calculation of the averages). Therefore, we accounted for longer genetic distances while still allowing for long-range binding, approximately reflecting the dynamic and folded architecture of the locus (38). In cells with weakened silencers, we reduced the effective binding constant of the Sir complex to silencers, e.g., in the sir1Δ strain we reduced the binding affinity of silencers to almost that of histone pairs (SI Appendix, sections 1 and 3). As the binding of the Sir complex to histone pairs occurs in dimers, its rate, following mass action kinetics, is quadratic in the number of unmodified (and unbound) H3-H4 pairs and inversely proportional to a characteristic volume V (see Fig. 1B and SI Appendix, section 1 for the analogously constructed dimerization rate with silencers). Similarly, the Sir2 deacetylation rate depends on the product of the amount of Sir complex at the locus and the acetylated H3-H4 pairs (see Fig. 1B for the mathematical form), with the same volume dependency. The characteristic volume V can be estimated by the volume occupied by the locus, since it is within this volume that these processes take place. We also considered that Sas2 and Sir2 can acetylate and deacetylate (respectively) H3-H4 pairs methylated at H3K79, with analogously constructed reaction rates with the same reaction constant values as in the unmethylated case. The acetylation and methylation processes comprise the activating pathway, while Sir complex binding and Sir2 deacetylation are defined as the silencing pathway (Fig. 1B). Finally, DNA replication was modeled with every nucleosome having a

50% probability of being replaced by one which is fully acetylated and unmethylated, since, in S. cerevisiae, most of the H4 histones in the nucleoplasm are acetylated (39). The 50% probability of replacing a nucleosome at replication is supported experimentally in budding yeast (40). It is noteworthy that there is no known demethylase for H3K79 in budding yeast. Hence, loss of methylation is necessarily due to dilution at replication. In the following, we detail four alternative models we explore in this work. Baseline model. The baseline model is the one described above and in Fig. 1 A and B, where the volume parameter V in the rates of processes that involve contacts within the locus (Sir dimerization at nucleosomes and Sir2 deacetylation) remains a constant. Trimethylation model. The trimethylation model adds two methylated intermediate states to the model, me1 and me2. We assume that the Sir complex can still bind to H3-H4 pairs with H3K79me1, but not H3K79me2 and H3K79me3. We confirmed that a model where Sir can only bind to H3K79me0 behaved similarly. The methylation reactions occur similarly through Dot1 (only if the underlying H3-H4 pair is acetylated) but add only one methyl group at a time (this implies that the rate constant of Dot1 methylation, kDot1 , must increase from its value in the baseline model so as to allow levels of H3K79me3 similar to those in the baseline model, see Fig. 1D). For a full diagram of the states and transitions in this model, see SI Appendix, Fig. S1 and section 4.1. Turnover model. Nucleosome turnover rates have been measured in budding yeast revealing that highly transcribed genes (high H4K16ac) appear to have higher turnover rates (41). Therefore, we included turnover in our model by assuming that if a nucleosome comprises at least one Sir-bound H3-H4 pair, then the turnover rate is zero. However, if the nucleosome comprises no Sirbound H3-H4 pairs and at least an acetylated one, then the turnover rate is proportional to 3kturn . In all other cases (i.e., none of the two H3-H4 pairs in

[Page 4]

a nucleosome are Sir-bound nor acetylated), the turnover rate is proportional to kturn . After turnover, both H3-H4 pairs within a nucleosome are replaced by demethylated but acetylated H3-H4 pairs. Given that our model considers H3-H4 pairs independently, the turnover rates of each nucleosome type are quadratic with the number of H3-H4 pairs that compose it, to reflect the probability that these two H3-H4 pairs are found in the same nucleosome. For example, the rate to turn over a nucleosome formed by an unmodified H3-H4 pair and acetylated but unmethylated one is proportional to na nu (for details, see SI Appendix, section 4.1). The parameter values were taken from the estimates in ref. 41. Given reports of nucleosome turnover influencing H3K79 methylation levels (42), we also considered a model that combines turnover and three methylation states (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 and section 4.1). Dynamic volume model. Crucially, Sir complex binding to histones and Sir2 deacetylation, the two steps in the silencing pathway, rely on contacts between regions within the locus. Contacts within the locus will depend on the threedimensional locus configuration, which, in a first approximation, could be modeled by quantifying the three-dimensional volume occupied by the locus: large if the locus is open (with few contacts within the locus), or small if the locus is in a compact configuration (allowing many more contacts). In terms of polymer physics, we estimated the volume occupied by the locus, V, as proportional to Rg3 , where Rg is the radius of gyration of the locus (43). Moreover, there is evidence that H4K16 acetylation is critical in determining the physical conformation of chromatin (11, 12, 44), due to H4 tail-DNA contacts [according to molecular dynamics simulations (37) and in vitro experiments (45)]. Within the simple framework of the Flory mean-field theory for polymers (46, 47), one can write a mean-field free energy for a real polymer whose minimization gives the equilibrium value of the radius of gyration. In the silenced state, the locus is compact and highly deacetylated. In this limit, we can consider the nucleoplasm a poor solvent for the locus, where an interplay between attractive and repulsive (mostly steric or excluded volume) interactions are the strongest determinants for chain conformation. For highly compact chains the entropic contributions to the free energy are negligible and, in the case of low acetylation, the effective two-body interaction is attractive. Then, the free energy of the system can be estimated by n + nub + nm L3 F ∼v u L+w 6, Rg Rg

[1]

where L is the number of nucleosomes in the locus, v is the effective two-body interaction (v < 0), and w the three-body steric interaction (43). The attractive two- ( ) body interaction is proportional to nu + nub + nm L , where nu is the number of unmodified (and not Sir-bound) H3-H4 pairs, nub is the number of Sir-bound H3-H4 pairs, and nm is the number of methylated (but not acetylated) H3-H4 pairs, because unacetylated H4 tails are thought to drive compaction by contacts with DNA and other histone cores (12, 37). However, in compact chains (a closely packaged locus), the three-body interaction is strong (last term in Eq. 1) and is dominated by excluded volume terms, which make w strongly positive and prevent an unphysical collapse of the chain. Note that we assume the attraction is solely due to the lack of acetylation of the H4 tail itself, and it does not directly depend on Sir complex binding or methylation. If the chain is allowed to equilibrate with respect to its physical conformation, which should be the case on the long timescales considered here, then the volume of the locus is given by the minimization of the free energy, yielding Rg3 ∼

2wL . |v|(nu + nub + nm )∕L

[2]

To prevent a divergence in the case where acetylation is maximal, we used the following functional form in the model: Vmax LV , V= [3] 1 + (Vmax − 1) (nu + nub + nm )∕(2L) 0 where V0 is the unit of volume and Vmax is the ratio between the minimum and maximum volume. Importantly, this functional form retains the essence of the scaling found from the Flory picture in the compact limit (Eq. 2). More accurate expressions for the locus volume could be given for both active and silenced

(expanded and compact) loci but given the lack of distance or contact measurements at the scale of the HMR locus, we deemed this approximation sufficient for our purposes. Therefore, the DVM is the same as the baseline model but V now is a dynamical variable instead of a constant. The locus volume follows Eq. 3 and is reduced in loci with many unmodified H4 tails while it expands if the levels of H4K16ac are high. Finally, compaction is seen as a characteristic of the locus as a whole, consistent with our assumption of every nucleosome interacting with each other. In a locus of this size (only 12 nucleosomes in the wild type), it seems unlikely that isolated regions within the locus can coexist given the reported contacts between the silencers (38). Hence, a state of the locus with both acetylated and deacetylated nucleosomes would exhibit an intermediate degree of compaction throughout the entire locus. Consistent with this dynamic volume picture, there are frequent contacts between the two silencers and the nucleosomes in the wild type, when the locus is fully silenced, but these contacts diminish in a sir3Δ mutant, where silencing is abolished (38). Overall, these acetylation-dependent volume dynamics provide the link between the physical conformation of the locus and the histone PTM levels. Parameters. Given the variety of processes involved in the silencing of the locus,

from protein binding to DNA replication, estimating the timescales for these dynamical processes is important for a comprehensive and quantitative understanding of silencing. The fastest process is Sir protein binding and unbinding, on the order of tens of seconds (34). Acetylation and deacetylation of histone H4 tails occurs at an intermediate timescale, around 10 min (48). Finally, since the only way to lower the number of H3K79me3 marked histones is by dilution at replication (49) and the H3K79me3 levels do not seem saturated even in expressed cells (31), the timescale of H3K79 methylation must be on the order of the duration of the cell cycle, i.e., approximately 2 h. The parameters of the model we developed reflect these experimental findings. For a full list of parameters, see SI Appendix, sections 1.5, 3, 4.1, and 4.5. While the list of parameters is relatively extended, the correspondingly more sophisticated model enables us to consider the many and multifaceted perturbations of HMR for which quantitative experimental data exist. BC. Since sir1Δ strains are bistable, one of the guiding principles we use to select

a model is whether it can recapitulate this bistability. We quantify this with the BC, defined in ref. 50: γ2 + 1 , BC = where γ is the skewness and κ is the kurtosis of the distribution. For the model, we apply it to the distribution of acetylated histones just before DNA replication. Typically, values of the BC larger than ~0.55 are considered to correspond to bimodal distributions, which is an indicator of two stable states. However, given that the switching rates in sir1Δ strains are of the order of 1-10% per generation, we require a higher degree of bimodality in order to be able to withstand perturbations over many cell cycles. Note that, due to the discrete nature of our model (individual histone pairs), the BC produces spurious high values for very silenced or active states (see bottom right and top left corners in some of the parameter sweeps in Fig. 1D). Thus, beyond a high BC, a successful model should also display strongly polarized stable states, this is, showing large differences in Sir binding and histone PTMs between silent and expressed cells, as seen in ref. 31. We quantified this aspect in Fig. 1E. Implementation. The model was then implemented with a stochastic simulation algorithm (51). The implementation of the model, as well as the data generated for the figures in this paper, can be found in https://github.com/AMovillaMiangolarra/ Conformation_Acetylation_Feedback_2023. The statistics shown in the figures of this work correspond to simulations sampled over 105 generations. Experimental Methods. Strain construction. Strains and oligonucleotides used in this study are listed in

SI Appendix, Table S1. Insertions of DNA into HMRα were achieved using CRISPR/ Cas9 technology (52). To do this, sgRNAs that spanned the precise insertion sites were generated. Additionally, repair templates containing DNA from HML, K.lac Leu2, or K.lac Ura3 were amplified with flanking homology to HMRα, such that recombination of these templates with HMRα would insert DNA within the sgRNA cut site. Cotransformation of a Cas9/sgRNA plasmid with an appropriate repair template produced cells that constitutively cut the sgRNA-targeted site and thus remain arrested; these cells would only grow into a colony if a mutation, such as

[Page 5]

insertion of the desired repair template, disrupted the sgRNA-targeted site. All mutations were confirmed by sequencing. Flow cytometry. To allow bistable populations of cells to reach equilibrium prior to flow cytometry, cells were grown at log-phase for 24 h. More specifically, three separate colonies (representing three technical replicates) of a given strain were used to inoculate three different cultures in YPD liquid media, which were grown to saturation at 30 °C overnight. These cultures were then serially backdiluted in YPD liquid media and maintained at log-phase at 30 °C over 24 h. After 24 h of log-phase growth, cells were pelleted, resuspended in 100 μL of 4% paraformaldehyde, fixed for 15 min at room temperature, pelleted, and then resuspended in 150 μL of 1× PBS solution. Flow cytometry was performed with an LSR Fortessa (BD Biosciences) with a FITC filter for Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP). At least 30,000 cells were analyzed per replicate. FlowJo software (BD Biosciences) was utilized to analyze flow cytometry data. All cells in the experiment were gated identically. Microscopy. Prior to microscopy, cells were grown in YPD overnight at 30 °C, and then to log-phase in the same conditions. Then, 3 μL of 0.5 OD cells were then spotted onto CSM agar plates. Once the spots were dry, a sterile spatula was used to cut out a small square that encompassed the cell spots, which was then removed and inverted onto a 35 mm glass bottom dish (Thermo Scientific 150682). Cells were then imaged using a Zeiss ZA inverted fluorescence microscope with a Prime 95B sCMOS camera (Teledyne Photometrics), Plan-Apochromat 63×/1.40 objective (Zeiss), MS-2000 XYZ automated stage (Applied Scientific Instrumentation), and MicroManager imaging software (Open Imaging). To generate timelapse images, samples were kept at 30 °C and humidified by a P-set 2000 Heading Incubation Insert (PeCon). Brightfield and fluorescence images were collected for 16 fields of view per sample, every 20 min for 10 h. A single Z-slice was acquired for each field of view at each timepoint. Images were analyzed with ImageJ (NIH). Silencing loss and silencing establishment events were counted manually with a single-blind approach.

Results Bistability. We aimed at building a model that, from known

biochemical facts, can quantitatively explain the experimental data, the first of them being the bistability of sir1Δ strains. In a sir1Δ mutant, HMR is found either in an active state (with high levels of acetylation) or in a silenced state (with low levels of H4K16ac and H3K79me3, but with high levels of the Sir complex bound), switching between the two typically on a timescale of tens of generations (31). To that end, the baseline model (Methods) was implemented with a stochastic simulation algorithm (51). Importantly, when trying to recapitulate the features of the bistable sir1Δ mutant, the baseline model could not explain the observed bistability. In Fig. 1C (Top), the simulation was initialized in a highly expressed state (high acetylation and methylation), but the active state was not stable for more than one generation. In Fig. 1D, we show the BC for a two-dimensional parameter sweep (for the rate constants kSir2 and kDot 1) in the baseline model. While it can have some limited bistability in certain parameter regions, it is not enough to explain the robustness and polarization of states observed in experiments. We thus turned to the other models described in Methods (turnover, multiple methylation states, and dynamic volume), whose BCs can be seen in Fig. 1D. We found that the only model that provided a substantially higher degree of bistability was the dynamic volume model (DVM). In fact, the simulation in Fig. 1C (with the same parameter values and initial condition) confirms the stark differences between the baseline and the DVM, in terms of polarization and stability of both states. A crucial parameter in this model is Vmax , the ratio between the minimum and maximum acetylation-dependent volumes: a modest value of 1.23 already promotes bistability, but we found 1.53 to be much better aligned with the bistability requirements while being small enough to still be realistic.

Therefore, generation of strongly bistable behavior required acetylation-dependent volume changes. In the model, the silencing processes (Sir binding and Sir2 deacetylation) depend on contacts between nucleosomes within the locus, but the activating processes do not. As a result, an expanded locus would favor activation, whereas a compact one would promote silencing. The system could therefore become locked in a compact and silenced locus by the interaction between enzymes promoting loss of activating histone PTMs and the compact volume which enhances the binding of these enzymes. Stochastic silencing loss was rare but did occur (roughly every 100 generations) and when this happened the locus now locked itself into an expressed state, where the locus had expanded due to the higher acetylation making it difficult for the Sir complex to bind and reverse the changes. These two stable states were highly polarized, one of them having high Sir protein binding and low H4K16ac and H3K79me3, while the expressed state showed little protein binding and high levels of acetylation and methylation. Given this success, the model we use for the rest of this work is the DVM. We also found quantitative agreement between the model and experiments in the amount of Sir binding and histone PTMs in each of the two states (silenced and expressed), see Fig. 1E. In the simulations the locus is considered expressed if, immediately before DNA replication, half or more of the H3-H4 pairs are either acetylated or methylated, a reasonable threshold given recent experimental data (53). However, due to the bistable nature of the model, varying this threshold moderately did not produce significant changes to the model output. A quantitative comparison was then made with data from ref. 31, by normalizing the ChIP profiles to the highest peak for each of the antibodies separately (not shown in our figure for Sir3 or H3K79me3 because the highest peak occurs in the wild type or sir4Δ strains, see figure 1 in ref. 31), in an attempt to estimate the fractional occupancy. With this assumption the agreement between the model and experiments is good. Note that the model did not include details of the position of the nucleosomes or any sequence-dependent effect other than the silencers, so the model results were not able to recapitulate the local peaks within the body of the locus. Overall, we found that the DVM effectively captured the known behavior of the HMR locus. Switching Rates at the HMR Loci with Different Genetic Lengths.

Previously, two of us published the results of an experiment in which the genetic length of the HMR locus, and thus the number of nucleosomes between the silencers, was varied and the silencing establishment/loss switching rates were measured. If epigenetic memory of the transcriptional state of the locus is transferred to daughter cells by nucleosome inheritance, having fewer nucleosomes in the locus should make inheritance less stable, as there would be more variability in the fraction of nucleosomes inherited. In fact, such a decrease of epigenetic stability with the decrease in size of the genetic region had been predicted by some theoretical models (24, 28). However, this is not what was observed in ref. 54. There was no change in silencing loss rates and an increase, although statistically not significant, in the silencing establishment rates as the number of nucleosomes was reduced. Recapitulating these data is a strict test of the model, since it requires a fine balance between reaction rates that scale differently with locus size. With appropriate parameters (SI Appendix, section 1.5), the model could recover the results obtained in that experiment, see Fig. 2 A and B, if we assumed that the fluorescent protein measurements in the experiments are delayed by a few hours with respect to the chromatin state, due to subsequent transcription and translation. Consequently, in the statistics of the model, we did not consider switching events that are reversed in less than two generations, as such events would not be visible experimentally via a fluorescent protein

[Page 6]

Silencing estab. rate (1/gen.)

Saxton, 2019 Model

Nucleosome number Saxton, 2019 Experimental Model

6 8 10 12 14 16 Nucleosome number

Silencing loss rate (1/gen.)

Saxton, 2019 Model

Silencing loss rate (1/gen.)

Silencing estab. rate (1/gen.)

Nucleosome number

6 8 10 12 14 16 Nucleosome number

Fig. 2. Switching rates as a function of nucleosome number. (A and B) Silencing establishment and silencing loss rates (respectively) in a sir1Δ background for loci with different nucleosome number (different genetic length). The results from the model are shown in black and, in red, the experimental data from ref. 54. (C and D) Switching rates shown as in A and B, but shown for a wider range of genetic lengths, by combining data from ref. 54, in red, with additional experimental data obtained specifically for this study (blue). The labeling for panel D is the same as for panel C. There are two datapoints for the 14 nucleosome strains, as two different strains were created by introducing the same DNA into two different locations at the locus. The results of the model are shown in black, but the parameters in C and D have been modified slightly with respect to the results in A and B, to better capture the new data. For details regarding the parameters, see SI Appendix, section 1.5. The error bars represent the 95% CI.

assay. With these considerations, the model produced an important prediction: the silencing loss rate as a function of the number of nucleosomes in the locus remains approximately constant, while the silencing establishment was reduced substantially as the genetic locus size increases. There are two effects at play when reducing the number of nucleosomes between the silencers in the simulations. First, since we still have two silencers, their effect on the remaining nucleosomes is stronger (the number of nucleosomes per silencer decreases), making the locus more prone to silencing. Second, as pointed out above, there is a decrease in the reliability of inheritance for smaller loci. In the case of the silencing loss rate, these effects counteracted each other to a certain extent: as the locus size was reduced, the silencers became more effective (lowering the silencing loss rate), but inheritance less faithful (increasing the loss rate). Crucially, for the case of silencing establishment, both effects reinforced this rate as we decreased the nucleosome number, rather than canceling out, leading to qualitatively different behavior. The model predicted a continuation of this trend for larger loci, an important result which we therefore tested experimentally, as any such trend identified in earlier experiments was not statistically significant. Strains with 14 and 16 nucleosomes in the HMR locus were created by inserting intergenic DNA found at HML into the endogenous HMR-GFP locus. We tested other sources of intragenic DNA with similar results regarding the overall fraction of silenced cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S2), since every mutant with an increased number of nucleosomes at the locus showed a higher

degree of fluorescent protein expression than for the wild-type length (12 nucleosomes), as expected from the model. To test the model predictions, we experimentally measured the switching rates for these strains and, in agreement with the model, the silencing establishment rate decreased substantially (Fig. 2C), a decrease that was statistically significant (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). In fact, the decrease in the silencing establishment rate was even more marked than initially predicted by the model, which forced us to modify certain parameters. Since the effect of silencers is partially responsible for the trend in the silencing establishment, giving more importance to silencers in the model (with respect to histones) should increase the steepness of the trend. By increasing the parameter that controls the affinity of the Sir complex to silencers and decreasing that for histones, the model was able to better capture the 20-fold drop in the experimental establishment rate over the 6 to 16 nucleosome range. For details on the parameters used in Figs. 1 and 2 C and D and the rest of the paper, as well as the original parameter set in Fig. 2 A and B, see SI Appendix, section 1.5, and for the results with the original parameter set see also SI Appendix, Fig. S4. With respect to the silencing loss rate, the model predicted limited changes with both parameter sets (Fig. 2 B and D). The experiments confirmed this as the silencing loss rate did not change significantly when increasing the genetic length of the locus (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). Overall, there did not seem to be a trend in the silencing loss rate since there were no statistically significant changes within the two experimental datasets. Nevertheless, there was a substantial dispersion between the results obtained in this work and those of ref. 54 for reasons that were unclear, although this ~2-fold dispersion remains very small compared to the 20-fold variation in the establishment rate. Altogether, the model predictions for silencing establishment/ loss rates as a function of locus size were well supported by our experimental data. Chromatin Binding. As argued above, silencing at the HMR locus

occurs in a highly cooperative manner, due to the Sir complex binding and H4K16ac feedback. Traditionally, the process had been viewed as nucleation of the Sir proteins starting at the silencers and subsequent spreading toward the rest of the locus. In contrast, in ref. 31, two of us found that the extent of Sir binding on nucleosomes also has an effect on the occupancy levels of the silencers, making cooperativity between silencers and nucleosomes a two-way interaction. The model has no sequence dependency other than the silencers’ position and considers every nucleosome to be able to equally interact with any other. Thus, the extent to which such a model could capture the observed cooperativity between genetic features in the locus was unclear. By reanalyzing ChIP data for Sir complex binding in different histone mutants, an overall nucleosome occupancy value was obtained, which could be compared to the outcome of the model. Fig. 3A depicts the area under the curve (AUC) for the E silencer as a function of the AUC of the nucleosomes across the locus for different histone mutants, with both quantities normalized to the wild-type. This analysis revealed a good accordance between the experimental data and the model. The histone and Sir mutants were chosen to reduce the spreading on nucleosomes but not directly alter the binding to silencers. These included H4K16Q (an acetyl mimic), H3K79L (a methyl mimic), Sir3-bahΔ (Sir complex whose nucleosome-binding domain has been deleted), and sir2-N245 (catalytically inactive for H4K16ac deacetylation). For details on the modeling of these mutant strains, see SI Appendix, section 3. In agreement with the mutual cooperativity picture between silencers and nucleosomes, as the Sir binding to nucleosomes decreased, so did the E silencer binding, both in the model and the experiments. The nonlinear cooperativity is noteworthy, with more than half of the

[Page 7]

HMRE binding

HMRE binding

Experiment Model

Experiment Model

Nucleosome binding

Nucleosome binding

Fig. 3. Binding of the Sir complex to the E silencer and to nucleosomes. (A) Binding at the E silencer (HMRE) as a function of binding at nucleosomes for different histone mutants. Experimental data from ref. 31 is shown in purple circles and modeling, in green squares. The data (modeling and experimental) is normalized to the wild-type, shown in the top-right hand corner. The mutant strains are, from right to left, H3K79L, H4K16Q, sir3-bahΔ and sir2-N345. (B) Same data as A but for a Sir4 titration in the wild-type HMR locus. The experimental data (strain with estradiol-inducible promoter) is normalized to the population with the highest Sir complex binding in the titration (data from ref. 31) while the modeling output has been normalized to the wild-type Sir concentration in simulations (the estradiol-induced population with the highest Sir complex binding had Sir expression and binding levels similar to the wild type). Experimental error bars correspond to SD (independent in each direction) from two different replicates. (A and B) Model parameters shown in SI Appendix, section 3.

drop in E silencer binding taking place when the nucleosome Sir binding is less than 20% of the wild-type value. According to the model, the cooperativity signature seen in these experiments resulted from the way the Sir complex binds to the locus (dimerization) and the deacetylation activity of Sir2. As the amount of Sir binding at the nucleosomes decreases, so does the number of unmodified H3-H4 pairs (due to lower deacetylation rates). This results in a lower binding of the Sir complex to the E silencer, as it requires two binding sites, one of them being the E silencer and the other one being either the I silencer or the depleted unmodified H3-H4 pair pool. This argument highlighted the importance of the silencer–nucleosome cooperativity and explains why most of the drop in E silencer binding occurred when nucleosome Sir binding was low: the E silencer only needs one unmodified H3-H4 pair to dimerize with, hence until the number of unmodified H3-H4 pairs became very low the E silencer did not feel much of the effect. In a similar manner, we show the E silencer binding against nucleosome binding in a Sir4 titration for the wild-type HMR locus, using an estradiol-inducible promoter to tune the concentration (data from ref. 31, see Fig. 3B). This time the relationship was roughly linear in both simulations and experiments, since we were varying the overall Sir complex concentration in solution, which directly affected silencers and nucleosomes equally. Taken together, the analysis shown in Fig. 3 implied that the minimal mathematical model used for chromatin, which represents short-lived locus-wide contacts, was adequate and could capture the observed cooperativity between silencers and nucleosomes. In addition, the model shed light onto the origin of the silencer–nucleosome cooperativity, establishing as main cause the availability of unmodified H3-H4 pairs with which the silencer can dimerize. Switching Rates in Sir4 Titrations. In addition to the ChIP profiles

used in Fig. 3B, altered Sir4 levels obtained through different estradiol concentrations also modulated the switching properties of the locus (31). To compare the results from experiments with that of the model, we measured the switching rates in the simulation when varying the Sir complex concentration. However, at wild-type induction levels, the titrated Sir4 switching rates were substantially higher (roughly twofold) than those of the native promoter in both the

silencing loss and silencing establishment rates, due to reasons that remain unclear. For model comparisons, we therefore multiplied the theoretical switching rates by the ratio between the switching rates from the estradiol-inducible promoter at approximately wild-type induction and the native promoter (the aforementioned factor of 2). In this way, the relative output of the model designed for the native promoter can be compared with the estradiol-inducible experiments. In addition, a linear conversion was made to estimate the Sir complex concentration in the simulations from the estradiol concentration in experiments (for details see SI Appendix, section 1.2). After these transformations, there was good agreement between the model and experiments (Fig. 4A). As expected, both in the wild-type Sir+ and sir1Δ mutant, experiments and modeling agreed on a decrease in the silencing loss rate and increase of the establishment rate as the Sir4 concentration rises. Importantly, the region of bistability of the wild-type silencers is at low Sir concentration, while for the sir1Δ strain, it is at higher concentrations. More unexpected was the way in which the switching rates vary with Sir concentration. The model predicted a roughly exponential trend for the decrease of the loss rate (see Insets in Fig. 4A), consistent with the experimental data. However, this is not the case for the establishment rate, both in the model and the experimental data, hinting at an asymmetry in the way the switching occurs. One intuitive reason behind this asymmetry could be the effect of replication. In the simulations, when a cell was silenced at HMR, most H3-H4 pairs at HMR were unmodified and many of them were substituted by acetylated pairs at replication, while in a cell lacking silencing, acetylated and methylated histones were substituted by only acetylated ones. Thus, to obtain insights into the contribution of replication dynamics on the switching of transcriptional states, the distribution of unmodified histones before and after replication was obtained (shown in Fig. 4 B, Top), only for cases where HMR in the daughter cell became expressed after it was not in the mother cell, i.e., silencing was lost. On average, only half the unmodified H3-H4 pairs should have been lost. However, in cases where the silencing was lost after replication, substantially more than half were lost in most cases, implying a critical role for replication in the loss of HMR silencing. Therefore, one could speculate that most of the stochastic contribution to the silencing loss stems from an atypically large loss

[Page 8]

Sil. estab. (sim) Sil. loss (sim) Sil. estab. (exp) Sil. loss (exp) 0.4 Sil. loss (estim)

Sir4 conc.

Sir4 conc.

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Unmod. fraction (Sil. loss)

Before Replic. After Replic.

Before Replic. After Replic.

Prob.

Sil. estab. (sim) Sil. loss (sim) Sil. estab. (exp) Sil. loss (exp) 0.2 Sil. loss (estim)

Prob.

Wild type Transition rates (1/gen.)

Transition rates (1/gen.)

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Methyl. fraction (Sil. estab.)

Fig. 4. Switching rates in a Sir4 titration. (A) Silencing establishment and silencing loss rates in the wild-type (Left) and in a sir1Δ background (Right). Insets show the silencing loss rates, in logarithmic scale, including an estimate (estim.) based on the inheritance probabilities at chromosome replication, see Eq. 4. The experimental data were obtained from ref. 31 and are compared with the output of the simulations (see text). (B) Histone PTMs before (blue) and after (red) replication. Top: Fraction of unmodified H3-H4 pairs before and after the replication event at the beginning of the generation where silencing loss occurs. Bottom: Fraction of methylated H3-H4 pairs before and after the replication event at the beginning of the generation where silencing establishment takes place. Model results in panel B shown for a sir1Δ mutant at wild-type concentration. (A and B) Model parameters shown in SI Appendix, section 1.5).

of unmodified nucleosomes at replication and not from the dynamics of the system after replication. In that case, one could set a threshold for the maximum number of unmodified H3-H4 pairs a locus can inherit in order to lose silencing in the following generation. If, after replication, the locus possessed more unmodified histone pairs than the threshold it would remain silenced, but it would otherwise become expressed. The following approximation to the silencing loss rate could then be obtained, given the knowledge of the distribution of unmodified H3-H4 pairs in the silenced state before replication Psil (nu ) and the threshold M: Ploss =

∑

nu

( ) ∑M Psil nu Bin(i, nu , p = 0.5), i=0

[4]

where Ploss ) loss probability per cell and generation ( is the silencing and Bin i, nu , p = 0.5 is the binomial probability distribution of i unmodified H3-H4 pairs remaining after replication, given that there were nu before, and that the probability p of losing each of them is 50%. The sum over i implies that, in this approximation, any locus with a number of unmodified H3-H4 pairs between 0 and M will become expressed. The sum over nu accounts for the probabilities that the locus has a different number nu of unmodified H3-H4 pairs and, thus, it would require a different number of successful removals of unmodified histones to become activated. The threshold M was obtained from the average of the probability distribution after replication for cells that will become expressed (red probability distribution in Fig. 4 B, Top). For the values of the threshold M, see SI Appendix, Fig. S5. This estimate for the silencing loss probability involved several approximations and assumptions: that the stochastic contribution stems exclusively from replication and not from any subsequent histone PTM dynamics and that histone pair removal at replication is independent of each other (a condition that explains the appearance of the binomial distribution in the estimate). As can be seen from the inset in Fig. 4A, these assumptions led to an estimate that was often off by ~50% with respect to the full model, but did set correctly the order of magnitude of the silencing loss rate and recapitulated the exponential trend. Hence, by introducing a simplified model only concerned with the stochastic redistribution of nucleosomes after replication with a new silencing threshold, we showed that the data are indeed consistent with fluctuations in the inheritance of nucleosomes at replication being a major driver of silencing loss.

Intuitively, the exponential trend could be due to replicationdependent nucleosome removal being an independent event for each nucleosome, which would be reflected in an exponential factor from the binomial distribution if the threshold scaled linearly with the Sir4 concentration. In fact, the threshold did not decrease in an exactly linear manner with the concentration, but this deviation was partially corrected by the combinatorial prefactor in the binomial distribution. Importantly, when this estimate was applied to silencing establishment rate, it failed to reproduce the outcomes of the model (see SI Appendix, Fig. S6). This result implied that, for the silencing establishment, the dynamics of histone PTMs during the rest of the cell cycle are a major source of stochasticity. This could also be seen from the distribution of methylated histones before and after replication (as methylation is the sole activating mark that can be lost at replication), in cases where silencing will be established in the next generation. In Fig. 4B (Bottom), these distributions are shown, and the average methylation loss is roughly half of the total amount (the expected average), suggesting that silencing establishment was not very dependent on loss of methylation at replication. Overall, the model was able to recapitulate the observed switching rates at different Sir concentrations and identified two different potential mechanisms for the transitions: a mechanism based on an anomalously large loss of unmodified histones at replication for the silencing loss, and a stochastic fluctuation in the histone PTM kinetics for the silencing establishment. In addition, the model predicted an exponential trend for the silencing loss that was consistent with the experimental data. Bistability of Silencing in Different Mutation Backgrounds.

Another useful aspect of the Sir protein titrations is the ability to look for bistable behavior for concentrations that would otherwise not be experimentally accessible. Some Sir4 titrations for mutants affecting silencer strength were reported in ref. 31, leading to the conclusion that mutants in which silencers are made weaker are bistable at certain Sir4 concentrations, but even strong-silencer strains, such as the wild-type, become bistable with low enough Sir4 concentrations. Silencer strength was modulated by removing proteins that bind exclusively to silencers (such as Sir1) or by removing binding sites for scaffolding proteins at the silencers (such as the Rap1 binding site, Rap1 b.s., which also results in weaker silencers and can be viewed as an intermediate genotype between the wild-type silencers and the sir1Δ).

[Page 9]

BC

BC

BC

wild type

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4

Sir4 (μM)

Sir4 (μM)

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Sir4 (μM)

Fig. 5. Bistability in a Sir4 titration. BC for the wild-type and two silencer strength mutants, at different Sir4 concentrations. Experimental BC in blue (circles), theoretical BC in red (triangles). Experimental data from ref. 31.

The model recapitulated the fact that bistability is enhanced in a different range of Sir concentrations in each strain, depending on the strength of the silencers. By lowering the concentration of Sir proteins, we obtained loci that would transition from a fully expressed state (mostly acetylated) when the Sir concentration is low, to a fully silenced one for high Sir concentrations, passing through an intermediate concentration region where the system can transition back and forth between active and silenced states (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). We quantified the bistability of the model for each silencer strength mutant at various concentrations using the BC (Methods). We then sought to quantitatively compare the theoretical predictions with the experimental data, by computing the BC from the distribution of GFP intensity (in logarithmic scale, as reported in ref. 31 obtained from experiments. The comparison between the experimental and the theoretical BCs, for different silencer strength mutants and Sir4 concentrations, is shown in Fig. 5. While the comparison was not quantitatively precise, the overall trends and location of the peaks were captured by the model, showing that stronger silencers tend to have a peak in bistability at very low Sir4 concentrations, but weaker silencers can broaden the bistability window and shift it toward higher Sir complex concentrations. It is remarkable that the sir1Δ strain could sustain a high bistability degree over a large concentration window, both in experiments and in the model, as opposed to rap1 b.s.Δ or the wild-type that displayed a more pronounced peak at mid or low concentrations. Reasons for the imperfect quantitative agreement may include using the same methodology (except for the logarithmic scale in the fluorescence assays) for experimental and synthetic data which have different sources of noise, or the metric being heavily impacted by very rare events which were either not seen in experiments or overestimated by the model. Nevertheless, given that the output of the model was at the level of chromatin modifications, but the output of experiments was fluorescent protein levels, we expect that the main reason for a reduced quantitative agreement is that transient fluctuations at the chromatin level need not translate to fluctuations at the protein level, yielding a lower experimental BC, as observed. To make a more accurate comparison between the data and model, it would be necessary to extend the model to include a detailed description of transcription/translation, but that lies beyond the scope of the present work. Discussion In the present work, we have investigated the hypothesis of dynamic changes in the three-dimensional conformation of the

locus substantially affecting the removal of histone modifications, thus bidirectionally linking chromatin compaction and histone PTMs. Deacetylation of H4K16 compacts the locus, which promotes Sir binding and further deacetylation via read–write activity of Sir2 with H4K16ac. Hence, we favored a picture whereby compaction is both cause and consequence of the histone PTM state of the locus: It is consequence as the chromatin conformation resulting from a silenced, unacetylated locus is compact, and it is cause since compact chromatin increases the output of histonemodifying enzymes that require contacts within the locus for their activity. These dynamic changes in chromatin conformation underpinned the bistability of the two transcriptional states, which enabled us to recapitulate the phenotypes observed in sir1Δ strains and to predict how the switching rates between states are altered with various perturbations. Not only is this an attractive hypothesis, but it is also solidly grounded on the current biochemical data. Recent studies found that cooperativity of Sir proteins is limited to a dimerization process (34), suggesting that Sir binding alone cannot explain the highly cooperative behavior observed in the dynamics of HMR. Indeed, previous modeling studies had captured the bistable behavior of the HML locus (29), but only by requiring much more cooperative protein binding dynamics than is observed. Thus, we identified another source of cooperativity, linking the acetylation of H4K16 and the activity of Sir2 to considerable changes in chromatin compaction, which have been observed in vitro (44). Together, these two sources of cooperativity constitute the silencing processes, with these dynamics balanced by the activating processes of acetylation and methylation. Thus, despite its relatively simple form, our HMR locus model captured a characteristic cooperative balance between activation and silencing, which is a hallmark of epigenetic silencing in many systems. Other examples of such a balance include opposing read–write feedback (15) or silencing read–write feedback opposed by the act of transcription itself (26). From our HMR model, we concluded that the experimental data were consistent with a mechanism of locus-wide cooperativity that is dominated by the dimerization behavior of the Sir complex, often between unmodified nucleosomes and silencers far away in genetic distance, but close in the physical distance. Long-distance interactions such as these had been reported before (38), but the extent to which they contributed to the overall cooperativity in the locus had remained unclear. Another key finding was the asymmetry in the behavior of silencing loss and establishment rates when subjected to changes in Sir4 concentration. According to the model, these two events had different origins; the silencing loss probability was mostly controlled by the stochasticity of nucleosome replacement at

[Page 10]

replication, while for silencing establishment the stochastic histone PTM dynamics played a major role. Moreover, the switching rates at a variety of locus lengths were well captured and the behavior predicted by the model was experimentally verified, highlighting the importance of size and physical space in genetic regulation. Two metrics were especially relevant: the one-dimensional genetic length between the silencers and the three-dimensional conformation of chromatin. If the genetic length was reduced, then the silencers would have a greater influence on the remaining (fewer) nucleosomes. In addition, a compact locus in three-dimensional space would enhance Sir binding and Sir2 deacetylation (which depend on intralocus contacts), but a locus in an expanded conformation would allow other PTMs to take over (H4K16ac and H3K79me3, in this case). Thus, the model successfully integrated one and three-dimensional effects into the dynamics of the locus. This goes beyond previous theoretical work focused on explaining the interplay between epigenetic marks and chromatin folding (17, 19, 22, 25, 28) by providing detailed mechanistic insights and quantitative predictions for a wide range of perturbations that were experimentally verified. Overall, we have found that the dynamic compaction and decompaction of the locus underpins the bistability of the locus in silencer strength mutants, where a robust and heritable transcriptional state is maintained across tens to hundreds of generations. However, it remains to be explored how robust this is with respect to cell-cycle-dependent processes other than DNA replication, such as genome-wide acetylation changes (55). Another limitation of this work was the isolated description of the HMR locus in the model: placing the locus in the context of the chromosome and comparing the regulation of the locus with that of other (possibly active) genes would yield valuable insights (56). Furthermore, if more detailed measurements of the conformation of the locus were available, a more ambitious physical modeling could be attempted (19, 37), which would most likely improve the predictive power of the model. Another extension that could enhance the accuracy of the model would be a detailed model of

E. Passarge, Emil Heitz and the concept of heterochromatin: Longitudinal chromosome differentiation was recognized fifty years ago. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 31, 106 (1979). H. D. Ou et al., ChromEMT: Visualizing 3D chromatin structure and compaction in interphase and mitotic cells. Science 357, eaag0025 (2017). R. C. Allshire, H. D. Madhani, Ten principles of heterochromatin formation and function. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 229–244 (2018). S. Kueng, M. Oppikofer, S. M. Gasser, SIR proteins and the assembly of silent chromatin in budding yeast. Annu. Rev. Genet. 47, 275–306 (2013). S. L. Klemm, Z. Shipony, W. J. Greenleaf, Chromatin accessibility and the regulatory epigenome. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 207–220 (2019). S. Preissl, K. J. Gaulton, B. Ren, Characterizing cis-regulatory elements using single-cell epigenomics. Nat. Rev. Genet. 24, 21–43 (2022). B. DeVeale et al., G1/S restriction point coordinates phasic gene expression and cell differentiation. Nat. Commun. 13, 3696 (2022). K. Kiani, E. M. Sanford, Y. Goyal, A. Raj, Changes in chromatin accessibility are not concordant with transcriptional changes for single-factor perturbations. Mol. Syst. Biol. 18, e10979 (2022). D. Grau et al., Structures of monomeric and dimeric PRC2:EZH1 reveal flexible modules involved in chromatin compaction. Nat. Commun. 12, 714 (2021). M. Ruault et al., Sir3 mediates long-range chromosome interactions in budding yeast. Genome Res. 31, 411–425 (2021). P. J. J. Robinson et al., 30 nm chromatin fibre decompaction requires both H4–K16 acetylation and linker histone eviction. J. Mol. Biol. 381, 816–825 (2008). R. Collepardo-Guevara et al., Chromatin unfolding by epigenetic modifications explained by dramatic impairment of internucleosome interactions: A multiscale computational study. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 10205–10215 (2015). M. M. Keenen et al., HP1 proteins compact DNA into mechanically and positionally stable phase separated domains. eLife 10, e64563 (2021). R. Leicher et al., Single-molecule and in silico dissection of the interaction between Polycomb repressive complex 2 and chromatin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 30465–30475 (2020). I. B. Dodd, M. A. Micheelsen, K. Sneppen, G. Thon, Theoretical analysis of epigenetic cell memory by nucleosome modification. Cell 129, 813–822 (2007). C. Hodges, G. R. Crabtree, Dynamics of inherently bounded histone modification domains. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 13296–13301 (2012).

transcription/translation, to precisely link chromatin state and protein-level measurements. In this study we have investigated a role for chromatin compaction, in which compaction is tightly linked with histone modification dynamics, influencing each other as part of a unified regulatory mechanism. This broader view complements the classical view of chromatin compaction as downstream of histone PTMs and regulatory circuits, by merely blocking transcription sterically. Our model and data, as well as previous literature, allow us to paint a more complete picture of the epigenetic regulation of the HMR locus in budding yeast, underscoring the importance of chromatin conformation and the physical dimension of the problem. However, we expect these considerations to be relevant in many other gene regulatory circuits and organisms. We have studied the effect an epigenetic mark itself can have on the physical conformation of chromatin and how that conformation may feedback into the regulation of the mark, but, in other instances, the change in conformation may be driven not by the epigenetic marks themselves but by the proteins recognizing the marks, such as HP1 or PRC2 (14, 57). Therefore, expanding on the present work to deepen our understanding of the interplay between the physics of chromatin conformation and epigenetic regulation could have far-reaching consequences in systems beyond baker’s yeast. Data, Materials, and Software Availability. Code and experimental data have been deposited in Github (https://github.com/AMovillaMiangolarra/ Conformation_Acetylation_Feedback_2023). Previously published data were used for this work (31, 54). ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank all members of the Howard and Rine groups for discussions. This work was funded by BBSRC Institute Strategic Programmes (BB/J004588/1 and BB/P013511/1) to M.H. and by a grant from the NIH (R35GM139488) to J.R.

Author affiliations: aDepartment of Computational and Systems Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich NR4 7UH, United Kingdom; and bDepartment of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720

17. D. Michieletto, E. Orlandini, D. Marenduzzo, Polymer model with epigenetic recoloring reveals a pathway for the de novo establishment and 3D organization of chromatin domains. Phys. Rev. X 6, 041047 (2016). 18. D. Michieletto et al., Shaping epigenetic memory via genomic bookmarking. Nucl. Acids Res. 46, 83–93 (2018). 19. S. H. Sandholtz, Q. MacPherson, A. J. Spakowitz, Physical modeling of the heritability and maintenance of epigenetic modifications. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 20423–20429 (2020). 20. D. Jost, C. Vaillant, Epigenomics in 3D: Importance of long-range spreading and specific interactions in epigenomic maintenance. Nucl. Acids Res. 46, 2252–2264 (2018). 21. N. A. Pease et al., Tunable, division-independent control of gene activation timing by a polycomb switch. Cell Rep. 34, 108888 (2021). 22. M. R. Williams, Y. Xiaokang, N. A. Hathaway, D. Kireev, A simulation model of heterochromatin formation at submolecular detail. iScience 25, 104590 (2022). 23. M. Katava, G. Shi, D. Thirumalai, Chromatin dynamics controls epigenetic domain formation. Biophys. J. 121, 2895–2905 (2022). 24. J. G. Wakim, S. H. Sandholtz, A. J. Spakowitz, Impact of chromosomal organization on epigenetic drift and domain stability revealed by physics-based simulations. Biophys. J. 120, 4932–4943 (2021). 25. J. A. Owen, D. Osmanović, L. Mirny, Design principles of 3D epigenetic memory systems. Science 382, eadg3053 (2023). 26. S. Berry, C. Dean, M. Howard, Slow chromatin dynamics allow polycomb target genes to filter fluctuations in transcription factor activity. Cell Syst. 4, 445–457.e448 (2017). 27. A. Angel, J. Song, C. Dean, M. Howard, A polycomb-based switch underlying quantitative epigenetic memory. Nature 476, 105–108 (2011). 28. J. F. Nickels et al., Establishment of heterochromatin in domain-size-dependent bursts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2022887118 (2021). 29. K. Sneppen, I. B. Dodd, Cooperative stabilization of the SIR complex provides robust epigenetic memory in a model of SIR silencing in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Epigenetics 10, 293–302 (2015). 30. H. Zhang, X.-J. Tian, A. Mukhopadhyay, K. S. Kim, J. Xing, Statistical mechanics model for the dynamics of collective epigenetic histone modification. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 068101 (2014). 31. D. S. Saxton, J. Rine, Distinct silencer states generate epigenetic states of heterochromatin. Mol. Cell 82, 3566–3579 (2022).

[Page 11]

45. F. Wang et al., Heterochromatin protein Sir3 induces contacts between the amino terminus of histone H4 and nucleosomal DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110, 8495–8500 (2013). 46. P.-G. De Gennes, P.-G. Gennes, Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics (Cornell University Press, 1979). 47. Q. Chaboche et al., A mean-field theory for predicting single polymer collapse induced by neutral crowders. bioRxiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.07.12.548683 (Accessed 10 August 2023). 48. J. H. Waterborg, Dynamics of histone acetylation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biochemistry 40, 2599–2605 (2001). 49. D. Goodnight, J. Rine, S-phase-independent silencing establishment in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. eLife 9, e58910 (2020). 50. SAS Institute, SAS/STAT 12.1 User’s Guide (SAS Institute, 2012). 51. D. T. Gillespie, Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions. J. Phys. Chem. 81, 2340–2361 (1977). 52. J. S. Lee, L. M. Grav, N. E. Lewis, H. Faustrup Kildegaard, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome engineering of CHO cell factories: Application and perspectives. Biotechnol. J. 10, 979–994 (2015). 53. K. Wu, N. Dhillon, K. Du, R. T. Kamakaka, Measuring the buffering capacity of gene silencing in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2111841118 (2021). 54. D. S. Saxton, J. Rine, Epigenetic memory independent of symmetric histone inheritance. eLife 8, e51421 (2019). 55. B. J. Wilkins et al., A cascade of histone modifications induces chromatin condensation in mitosis. Science 343, 77–80 (2014). 56. J. F. Nickels, K. Sneppen, Confinement mechanisms for epigenetic modifications of nucleosomes. PRX Life 1, 013013 (2023). 57. D. Canzio et al., Chromodomain-mediated oligomerization of HP1 suggests a nucleosome-bridging mechanism for heterochromatin assembly. Mol. Cell 41, 67–81 (2011).

32. L. N. Rusche, A. L. Kirchmaier, J. Rine, The establishment, inheritance, and function of silenced chromatin in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 72, 481–516 (2003). 33. M. I. Valencia-Sánchez et al., Regulation of the Dot1 histone H3K79 methyltransferase by histone H4K16 acetylation. Science 371, eabc6663 (2021). 34. R. Behrouzi et al., Heterochromatin assembly by interrupted Sir3 bridges across neighboring nucleosomes. eLife 5, e17556 (2016). 35. L. Pillus, J. Rine, Epigenetic inheritance of transcriptional states in S. cerevisiae. Cell 59, 637–647 (1989). 36. D. Donze, C. R. Adams, J. Rine, R. T. Kamakaka, The boundaries of the silenced HMR domain in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genes Dev. 13, 698–708 (1999). 37. S. E. Farr, E. J. Woods, J. A. Joseph, A. Garaizar, R. Collepardo-Guevara, Nucleosome plasticity is a critical element of chromatin liquid–liquid phase separation and multivalent nucleosome interactions. Nat. Commun. 12, 1–17 (2021). 38. L. Valenzuela, N. Dhillon, R. N. Dubey, M. R. Gartenberg, R. T. Kamakaka, Long-range communication between the silencers of HMR. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 1924–1935 (2008). 39. W.-J. Shia et al., Characterization of the yeast trimeric-SAS acetyltransferase complex. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 11987–11994 (2005). 40. G. Schlissel, J. Rine, The nucleosome core particle remembers its position through DNA replication and RNA transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 20605–20611 (2019). 41. M. F. Dion et al., Dynamics of replication-independent histone turnover in budding yeast. Science 315, 1405–1408 (2007). 42. E. J. Chory et al., Nucleosome turnover regulates histone methylation patterns over the genome. Mol. Cell 73, 61–72.e63 (2019). 43. M. Rubinstein et al., Polymer Physics (Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 2003), vol. 23. 44. A. Johnson et al., Reconstitution of heterochromatin-dependent transcriptional gene silencing. Mol. Cell 35, 769–781 (2009).
