[Page 1]

PeoU.Biophys~molec.Biol. 1982,Vol.39, pp. 183-231.

0079-.6107/82./030183.-49524.50/0

Copyright "~ 1982Pergamon Press Ltd.

Printed in Great Britain.All rillhtl reserved.

THREE-DIMENSIONAL STRUCTURE DETERMINATION BY ELECTRON MICROSCOPY OF TWO-DIMENSIONAL CRYSTALS L. A. AMOS*,RICHARDHENDERSON* and P. N. T. UNWlN? *MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, U.K. tStanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, U.S.A.

CONTENTS I. INTRODUCTION II. HISTORICALBACKGROUND IlL ELECTRONMICROSCOPYAND DIFFRACTION

I. Electron Scattering 2. Radiation Damage 3. Image Formation 4. Specimen Preparation 5. Diffraction Patterns 6. Experimental Recording of Micrographs IV. STRUCTUREDETERMINATIONIN THREE DIMENSIONS

1. Two Dimensional Crystal Terminology 2. Mathematical Concepts and Terms 3. Space Groups and Plane Groups V. THE ELECTRONMICROGRAPHS

1. Stained or Unstained Specimens 2. Optimal Defocus 3. Correction for CTF in Images of Untilted Specimens 4. Correction for CTF in Images of Tilted Specimens 5. The Number of Tilted Images Required to De/ine the Three-Dimensional Transform Accurately • 6. Optical Diffraction in the Evaluation of Images VI. ANALYSISOF EACH IMAGEINTO FOURIERCOMPONENTS

1. Transform of an Image of a 2-D Crystal 2. Extraction of Amplitudes and Phases of Fourier Components and Calculation of 2-D Filtered Images 3. Refinement of Parameters of Reciprocal Lattice 4. Shape of Diffraction Spots 5. Distortions and Defects in Real Crystals 6. Uneven Staining or Preservation 7. Phase Gradients Across Spots 8. Application of Crystallographic Symmetry 9. Phase Origin Refinement in Projection 10. Space Group Determination in Projection VII. COMBINATIONOF IMAGESTO FORM 3-D TRANSFORM

1. Determination of Scale Factor 2. Determination of Common 3-D Phase Origin 3. How Closely Spaced Need Spots be in z* ? 4. Absolute Hand of Structure 5. Space Group Determination in Three-Dimensions VIII. CALCULATIONOF THE STRUCTURE

1. Selection of Amplitudes and Phases of Continuous Transform 2. Missing Cone Problem IX. EXPERIENCESWITH 3-D ANALYSESOF 2-D CRYSTALS

1. Strategies for Data Collection 2. Contrast Variation in the Computed Structures 3. Interpretation of the 3-D Map 4. Experience with Different Negative Stains and Embedding Media

[Page 2]

L.A. AMOS, R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN

X. SOME RESULTS

1. Purple Membrane 2. Cytochrome Oxidase 3. Ribosomes 4. Tubulin 5. Gap Junctions 6. Cell Wall of Sulfolobus acidocaldarius 7. Thin 3-D Crystals

1. Acetylcholine Receptors 2. A TPase (Coupling Factor F1) 3. Antibody Labelling 4. Correction of Distorted Lattices and Analysis of Disordered Crystals 5. Limited 3-D Information from Shadowed Specimens

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

APPENDIX I: ESTIMATION OF TILT ANGLES AND TILT AXES

APPENDIX II: DENSIT()METRY

XI. RESULTS ON OTHER STRUCTURES OF SPECIAL INTEREST IN THE FORM OF 2-D ARRAYS

I. I N T R O D U C T I O N We give here a review of the electron microscope methods we have been using to determine the three-dimensional distribution of scattering matter in the average unit cell of a twodimensional crystal. The account, which is derived from material prepared for an EMBO practical course held at the Laboratory of Molecular Biology in September 1980, includes a section on the basic properties of the electron microscope and how it may be used to best advantage in analysing structure of biological molecules together with a section reviewing published work in electron microscopy of two-dimensional crystals. Thus, although the review is specifically aimed at those interested in the structure of 2-D crystalline arrays, much of the material is of general interest to anyone working on electron microscopy of biological specimens. The concepts and terminology stem largely from X-ray crystallography, with which we are assuming the reader has a basic familiarity. Lipson (1972) or Lipson and Taylor (1958) provide a good introduction to Fourier transforms as used in crystallography. The review is intended to be a descriptive guide with only the essential minimum of mathematics. The mathematical detail is given in various references which are cited below. II. H I S T O R I C A L B A C K G R O U N D Interest in the structure of biological molecules and assemblies dates to the first attempts at X-ray diffraction from protein crystals. However, it was the invention of the electron microscope which made possible direct images of biological structure at a macromolecular level. The early use of shadowing casting (Williams and Wyckoff, 1945), of negative stains (Hall, 1955; Huxley, 1957; Brenner and Horne, 1959; Huxley and Zubay, 1960) and even positive staining of ultra thin sections (Pease and Baker, 1948; Gettner and Ornstein, 1955) all showed the arrangement of subunits in biological assemblies. The first application of the principle of image processing involving molecular averaging of images of identical structures came with the rotational and translational superposition work of Markham et al. (1963, 1964) and the use of optical diffraction (Klug and Berger, 1964) and optical filtering in the diffraction plane (Klug and DeRosier, 1966). These methods allow two-dimensional averaging to produce images with higher signal-to-noise ratios than the original electron micrograph. Optical filtering was also used to disentangle superimposed two layer structures. These two dimensional procedures have since been extended to sophisticated practical (Erickson et al., 1978) and computer methods of both two-dimensional lattice (Amos and Klug, 1972; Aebi et al., 1973) and rotational (Crowther and Amos, 1971) filtering. Digital methods were first introduced by DeRosier and Klug (1968), who extended image processing to produce three-dimensional models of biological structures as seen in the electron microscope. The advantages of digitizing the images is that phases, as well as amplitudes, are readily available for analysis in the computed diffraction pattern or Fourier

[Page 3]

3°D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

transform. DcRosier and Klug applied the principle to a helical structure of sufficient multiplicity (T4 phage tails) that a 3-D model could be obtained from a single electron micrograph. There have subsequently been many similar analyses on other particles with helical symmetry (e.g. Finch and Klug, 1971; Unwin and Klug, 1974; Wakabayashi et al., 1975; DeRosier et al., 1977; Dykes et al., 1978; Taylor and Amos, 1981). Structures with less symmetry than found in these helical structures require that more electron micrographs should be combined together to build up sufficient 3-D data to determine the structure accurately in 3D. This is so for the case of icosahedral viruses (Crowther et al., 1970; Crowther, 1971) for which three or more images were required. Finally, with the work on purple membrane (Henderson and Unwin, 1975; Unwin and Henderson, 1975) there began the analysis of 3-D structures of 2-D crystals, which requires a much larger number of views. Detailed references specifically to work on individual 2-D crystalline arrays are given later. General reference works on the analysis of electron micrographs, written over the last few years, include "a discussion on new developments in electron microscopy with special emphasis on their application in biology" (Huxley and Klug, 1971), the proceedings of a meeting organized by Huxley and Klug in 1970, with a number of authors, and a broadly based review (Crowther and Klug, 1975). More mathematical reviews have been published by Mellema (1980) and Misell (1978). The most recent survey, from a number of contributing authors (Baumeister and Vogell, 1980) reports the proceedings of a meeting at which 2dimensional crystals were the main topic. III. ELECTRON

MICROSCOPY

AND DIFFRACTION

We come first to a description of some basic properties of electrons and how they are used in the electron microscope. At the present (1981 ) stage of development, electron microscopy combined with image analysis is considered to be useful for solving three-dimensional structures at moderate levels of resolution. Limitations arise from the difficulty of preserving specimens in the microscope vacuum, from radiation damage and from the requirement that the specimen be composed of ordered arrays of equivalent molecules which are extensive in one or two dimensions, but not more than a few hundred angstroms thick (see below). At higher resolution, sufficient to resolve atomic detail, X-ray diffraction of 3-D crystals is still the method of choice. In the following paragraphs we have to take account of the dual particle/wave nature of the electron. When dealing with subjects such as electron scattering, radiation damage and photographic recording it normally suffices to .regard electrons as charged particles. However with the processes of diffraction and image formation (particularly at high resolution) this treatment becomes inadequate, and effects need to be considered which can only be explained in terms of waves. 1. Electron Scattering The electron beam is modified during its passage through the specimen by both elastic and inelastic interactions. Electrons interacting with the potential field of atomic nuclei usually undergo elastic collisions. They emerge with their wavelength unchanged, but suffer a directional change and an associated ~ ~/2 phase shift. Electrons interacting with the outer (valence and bonding) electrons undergo inelastic collisions. They emerge with small changes in wavelength and transfer some of their energy to the specimen (typically about 25 eV). Only the elastic process is important in producing the interference effects responsible for contrast in the images and in forming diffraction patterns similar to those obtained with X-rays. Inelastically scattered electrons are poorly focused in the images (because of their lower energy and consequent greater deflection by the magnetic lenses) and they give rise to a background in the diffraction pattern which is strongly concentrated in the forward direction. This is illustrated by the scattering curves for carbon in Fig. 1. The ratio of the total elastic (ae) to inelastic (gi) cross-section (which is not much affected by the accelerating voltage) behaves roughly as: O'.._e_ _Z

gi

[Page 4]

L.A. AMOS, R. HENDERSON and P. N. T. UNWIN

Inelastic

1~0

1'5

e (tO "s radians)

FIG.1.Theoreticalelasticand inelasticelectronscatteringcross-sectionsfor carbonplottedon a linear scale as a function of scattering angle 0, for 75 kV electrons. (Burgeand Smith, 1962.) where Z is the atomic number (Crewe et al., 1970). Thus inelastic scattering predominates with biological molecules, causing extensive damage (see below). Electrons interact much more strongly with matter than do X-rays. There is a difference by a factor of ,-, 10,000 between atomic scattering amplitudes in the two cases. Electron scattering amplitudes also differ in that they decrease more rapidly with scattering angle and show less discrimination between heavy and light atoms. Thus whereas with X-rays Au atoms scatter 14 times more strongly than C atoms, with electrons they scatter only 5 times more strongly. Likewise, the disparity between the electron scattering amplitudes for H atoms and those for C, N and O is less marked. Electrons discriminate poorly between heavy and light atoms because the atomic nucleus is screened by the,surrounding electron cloud, so that its potential falls off more rapidly than would be the case otherwise. With heavy atoms this screening effect is accentuated and they therefore scatter less strongly than would be expected on the basis of atomic number alone. For C atoms and 100 kV electrons the mean free paths for elastic and inelastic scattering are 1300 ~, and 750 A respectively; for heavier atoms they are shorter (values for Au are 60 A and 600 A respectively) (Misell, 1973). Since the fidelity of the image decreases the more times the electron is scattered (multiple scattering introduces erroneous features) and the quality deteriorates (because of the relatively greater contribution from electrons which have been inelastically scattered) it is advantageous to have the specimen as thin as possible. But this is not critical. With stained molecules the fidelity and quality tend to be limited by the extent of preservation. Only occasionally is a specimen both sufficiently thick and well ordered to show evidence of multiple scattering; for example, the optical diffraction pattern of double layers of the bacterial cell wall studied by Finch et al. (1967) showed an extra reflection due to double scattering. With unstained molecules, the low atomic weights make multiple scattering events less frequent. Thus it generally works well in practice to assum~ tltat all biological specimens are weakly scattering objects. Such an assumption greatly ~mlifies the description of the process of image formation.

2. Radiation Damage Biological molecules, like most organic materials, are highly susceptible to radiation damage. The incident electrons lose large amounts of energy by inelastic int~actions, leading to the formation of numerous highly reactive ions and free radicals. These excited species cause alterations by rupturing bonds, fragmenting molecules and forming new, stable, crosslinks. Direct transfer of momentum from the incident electron to the atomic nucleus, causing

[Page 5]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

its displacement, may also occur (the threshold accelerating voltages for direct displacement of H and C atoms are ~ 3 and ~ 30 kV respectively) but the cross-section for this process is very much smaller than that for ionization, and excitation. Gross consequences of these reactions are heating of the specimen, mass loss and changes in chemical composition (H and O are more readily lost than C and N) (Bahr et al., 1965), as shown for gelatin in Fig. 2. Normal exposures in electron microscopy (about 500 electrons/A 2 to locate, focus and image a specimen at high magnification) result in radiation doses to the specimen of 1010_101 t rads (about equivalent to what it would receive if placed in the collimated beam of a rotating anode X-ray set for 1000 years!) and transform it into a highly cross-linked product, bearing little resemblance to the original material. Fortunately, these drastic alterations are not of great concern with stained specimens where one is just interested in molecular boundaries and it is more the properties of the stain than the biological matter it outlines which govern the appearance of the imag e . The stain is relatively stable and remains more or less in position during irradiation, although there is some movement, predominantly shrinkage, which decreases fidelity as the dose increases (Unwin, 1974). So-called "minimal dose" electron microscopy, referring to the 10-20 electrons/A 2 required to record a statistically reliable image, in which the specimen is located at low magnification and focusing at high magnification is carried out on an adjacent area, is therefore quite adequate for negatively stained preparations (Williams and Fisher (1970) and see later). But if one wishes instead to visualize, say, secondary protein structure in an unstained specimen, even minimal exposures, in the statistical sense, are too high. Measurements made from fading of electron diffraction patterns (see for example the fading, of the purple membrane diffraction pattern in Fig. 3) indicate that incident doses of the order of loo

~

H . m -

4c

-

~

)

-

~

-

lb

Dose- electrons/~2 FIG. 2. Changes in the chemical composition of gelatin as a function of electron dose. (Adapted from Bahr et al., 1965).

I£

)

i ,3)

0.5

1.0

Dose - electrons/~2 FIG. 3. Fading of some typical reflections in the electron diffraction patterns of purple membrane embedded in glucose. (From Unwin and Henderson, 1975.)

[Page 6]

L. A. AMOS,R. HENDERSON and P. N. T. UNwn~

0.5 electrons/A z or less would be more appropriate. The use of an exposure less than that required to completely destroy the specimen, as judged from the diffraction pattern, we refer to rather unutti~actorily as a very low dose exposure. With only 0.5 electrons/A 2 however, the number of elastic scattering events will be insufficient to allow the secondary structure to be directly vimafized with good counting statistics especially since the contrast expected from unstained structures is also much lower than that obtained with stained specimens. For accurate definition, a much higher and therefore completely destructive exposure would be needed. Table la gives the details in a more comparative way of the level of electron dose involved in different types of microscopy. It is thus impossible to observe secondary structure directly by electron microscopy without destroying it in the process. The only feasible way tO obtain the high resolution information is to combine data from different, equivalent, molecules so as to reinforce the genuine features in each of them and average out the statistical fluctuations. A two-dimensional crystalline array composed of 103-104 equivalent molecules is a particularly appropriate object for achieving this task. Combination of information from many different molecules is carried to extremes in X-ray crystallography of protein crystals. Protein crystals contain as many as 101~ equivalent molecules and a complete X-ray diffraction pattern is built up with few, if any, of these molecules being hit by the X-ray quanta more than once. It is the greater number of unit.cells involved, not the source of radiation, that makes X-rays appear less damaging than electrons. In fact, the damaging effect of X-rays expressed as the ratio of inelastic to elastic cross sections, is greater than that of electrons (Hoppe, 1971). TABLE l(a). SoME TYPICAL EXPOSURE LEVELS INVOLVED IN VARIOUS TYPES OF ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

Purpose of exposure Routine photograph Minimal beam

Electron dose required for focusing and preliminary adjustments

Electron dose requiredfor exposure el/,~2

Magnification

Optical density of film

200-500 0.01-0.03"

10-20 10-20

30,000-40,000 30,000-40,000

exposure of

Reference --

Williams and Fisher (1970)

stained specimen

Very low dose exposure of unstained specimen Higher dose exposure to accompany the the above

0.01-0.03"

0.5-4

40,000-50,000

0.05-0.3 "~

15-30

40,000-50,000

Unwin and Henderson (1975)

* Focusing is performed on an adjacent area, so the exposure in this case is only that required to locate the specimen at low magnification (say ~ 1000 × ). TABLE l(b). OPTICAL DL~srrY AND RESOLUTIONTO BE Exv~cleu

wrrH SOMETYPICAL EM FILM DEVELOPEDFOR MAXIMUMSI~ED (e.g. KODAK 4463, AGFA SCIENTIA,DUPONT GRAPHIC ARTS)

Magnification

Dose (e/A 2)

OD

d~(A)*

IO,OO0 I0,000 40~000 200,000 200,000

0.5 I0 0..._55 I0 0.5 I0

> 5 0.06 1.25 0.002 0.05

I0 I0 2.5 2.5 0.5 0.5

* Spacing related to object at which contrast is diminished by the photographic emulsion to 50~. (The corresponding spacing on the film is 10 ~. This dimension is determined by the spread of electrons within the emulsion (Valentine, 1966; Famell and Flint, 1975). In practice, other factors, e.g. magnetic fields, may make this figure closer to ~ 25 in which case d ~ would be multipfied by 2.5.)

[Page 7]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

3. Image Formation Similar principles of image formation apply to electron microscopy of thin biological specimens as apply to ordinary bright field light microscopy. Strictly, there is no absorption ofdectrons as there is of photons; however, loss of electrons from the image, apparent or real, through inelastic scattering or interception by the objective aperture has an analogous effect. One has to deal with much smaller numerical apertures in electron microscopy because of the inferior quality of magnetic lenses over glass ones, and this limits the resolution attainable to about 50 times the wavelength (2=0.037 A for 100 kV electrons) instead of I or 2 times as with light microscopy. A formal description of the process of image formation from the standpoint of Fourier optical theory can be found in a number of books or references (e.g. Brag,g, 1939; Heidenreich, 1964; Grimstone, 1968; Hawkes, 1972; Misell, 1978) but here it is appropriate to state only a few things by way of introduction. "Phase contrast" (i.e. constructive or destructive interference between the elastically scattered waves and the unscattered, transmitted, wave) is the dominant contrast mechanism for thin stained and unstained specimens at most spacings. It is almost zero when the optical path lengths of the scattered and unscattered waves are the same (because of the n/2 phase shift upon scattering which means that the scattered wave is in quadrature with the unscattered). Thus, with an aberration-free microscope and the object exactly in focus there is no difference in optical path lengths between the two waves (Fermat's principle) and therefore no phase contrast. In a real situation, however, the image is out of focus and spherical aberration is present. These defects combine to produce a phase shift in the scattered wave given by: Z = 2n2-1(6f02/2- C~ 0"/4) where 0 is the scattering angle, 6fis the degree of underfocus and C, is the spherical aberration coefficient of the objective lens (typically 1-4 mm). The effect of this phase shift, as a function of the reciprocal of the object spacing, 0/2, is referred to as the phase contrast transfer function (CTF). The phase shift in the scattered waves produces phase contrast, which is strongest when X= -+ n/2, because the scattered wave has been brought exactly into or exactly out of phase with the unscattered wave and now interferes with it. For a moderately underfocused image (obtained by weakening the objective lens) the effects of defocus and spherical aberration balance one another in such a way that X is approximately n/2 over a wide range of object spacings. This sort of setting will therefore be the most appropriate one to use in practice. The function, - 2 sin X, which provides a simple way of representing the effect of these phase shifts, is known as the phase contrast transfer function and is illustrated in Fig. 4 for a particular set of conditions. The product of the phase CTF and the Fourier transform of (the potential distribution in) the object gives the amplitude and phase of each Fourier term contributing to the image. In practice the CTF is modified by several optical factors besides 6f and C~: (a) Chromatic aberration of the objective lens Chromatic errors (i.e. energy differences in the electron beam) may arise from several sources, e.g. fluctuations in the HT supply, variation in the energy of the electrons emitted from the hot cathode (typically +0.4 eV) and energy losses as a result of inelastic scatt~'ing. The focus change is Co"6E/E (where E is the energy of the electrons and C¢ is the chromatic aberration constant of the objective lens--typically about 3 mm). The main effect is to smear out the CTF at high resolution, so that for these spacings the contrast becomes very weak.

Co) Partial coherence of the illuminatino beam The finite angular spread of the beam incident on the object causes diffracted waves corresponding to a given spacing to pass through a range of angles in the objective lens field. This predominantly causes the CTF to be attenuated in regions where the phase shifts are changing most rapidly. The effect of partial coherence is small if relatively small second condenser apertures are used (< 200/t) and if the object is not unduly out of focus.

[Page 8]

L.A. AMOS, R. HENDERSON and P. N. T. UNWIN (a)

0~x<~-,~

0•

[b)

,

•

, / ,

O/XcA.~)

FIG. 4. Phase contrast transfer functions for a Philips EM300 (C, = 1.6 ram, 100 kV) at underfocus values of (a) 1500 A and (b) 5500 A.

(c) Astigmatism Astigmatism is observed when the objective lens field is not perfectly symmetrical. The focus level varies with direction in the object plane, causing the CTF to lose rotational symmetry. (d) Amplitude conerast The effect of losing electrons from the coherent image by, for example, inelastic scattering or high angle elastic scattering, gives rise to an amplitude contrast term which varies as - c o s X. It has the same sign as the phase contrast produced by underfocus and its contribution will be greatest where Isin XI is small (e.g. for large spacings in the object). Amplitude contrast is unimportant with unstained specimens, but with negatively stained specimens its contribution is comparable to that of phase contrast. This is useful because it tends to make the total contrast transfer function fairly uniform for all low resolution object spacings (> 20 A) over a wide range of underfocus values (up to about I0,000 A). Note that the amplitude and phase contrast mechanisms oppose each other if the image is overfocused, making it difficult to interpret directly. Useful discussions of the relative importance of amplitude and phase contrast for light and heavy atoms are given by Unwin {1972) and Erickson and Klug (1971).

4. Specimen Preparation Specimen preparation plays a key role in successful electron structure determination and it is well worth spending much time and care on this aspect of the work. We assume you are familiar with the preparative procedures involved (see e.g. Hall, 1966; Kay, 1965; Valentine, 1961) and aim just to give some of the general guidelines we use in our attempts to optimize results. It is best to be flexible, as each specimen is different, having problems peculiar to itself. Some sort of protective medium generally needs to be appfied to surround the specimen and preserve its shape or higher order structure in the microscope vacuum. Heavy metal negative stains are of great value because they preserve shape, provide contrast and are

[Page 9]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

relatively stable under the electron beam. But they are only of value in examining gross structural features--to a resolution of about 20 A. To preserve detail within a protein molecule more appropriate environments are provided by non-ionic hydrophilic media such as glucose or ice (ifa cold stage is available). These latter media have the potential of bringing the resolution to near atomic dimensions, but their value in practice is complicated by the problem of radiation damage. Two aspects of primary importance are the properties of the support film and of the protective medium itself. Carbon and plastic (collodion or formvar) are the most widely used materials for support film. Carbon is almost invariably the more suitable since it is the better conductor and the most stable in the electron beam. Plastic films and thin carbon films (very light brown on filter paper) are susceptible to drift and breakage, making high image resolutions difficult to achieve. They are also susceptible to electrical charging effects, making them unsuitable supports for electron diffraction experiments. Carbon films when freshly prepared are usually fairly hydrophilic, but they become increasingly hydrophobic with time, especially if kept outside a dessicator. These properties influence the adhesion (and sometimes the preservation) of the specimens. Fresh films generally give best results for most specimens. Adhesion to old films can usually be improved by pre-soaking them in a ~0.1% solution of polylysine (Williams, 1977), cytochrome c or by ion bombardment ("glow discharging"). Films treated in the latter way can however disrupt fragile specimens and severely distort others. "Holey" support films (where the specimen ends up over openings in the film) are particularly useful where it is important to minimize distortions such as particle flattening or to ensure that the staining is even from both sides. Sometimes one might like to prepare a thin carbon film overlying a thick "holey" support film so that one can simultaneously minimize the amount of background noise and retain a certain degree of rigidity. The spreading of negative stains (or media such as glucose) is influenced by the properties of the support film and the specimen. Spreading, as well as adhesion, may be improved considerably by the addition of surfactant molecules such as serum albumin, cytochrome c or bacitracin to a concentration of ~ 0.1% in one or other of the solutions applied to the grid, by glow discharging or by the application of octadecanol (Gordon, 1972). Of the variety of negative stains which could be used, uranyl acetate or formate (at pH ~4.0) is very likely to give best results in terms of preservation and resistance to radiation damage. Sodium phosphotungstate (at pH ~ 7.0) may lead to significant improvements ifthe specimen is unstable at low pH, and methylamine tungstate (Faberg~ and Oliver, 1974), a nonionic stain, may well be less disruptive to specimens in which the degree of order is high only when ionic strength is low. Prior fixation of the specimen with glutaraldehyde, formaldehyde and/or osmium tetroxide may help in some cases. Auro-thio-glucose (available from Sigma) is potentially very useful as a non-ionic stain (see Section IX). It has the property of preserving molecular detail to high resolution at low doses like glucose and the advantage of providing more contrast than glucose (although less than the heavier metal stains). 5. Diffraction Patterns The short wavelength of high energy electrons makes the Ewald sphere much less curved than in the X-ray (Cu k~, 8 keV) case, and the electron diffraction pattern, for all practical purposes, is simply a plane through the three-dimensional reciprocal lattice (see below). Electron diffraction patterns can be used to provide structure factor amplitudes (see e.g. Fig. 5b) from crystals directly (rather than by Fourier transformation of micrographs), and to show up non-crystalline detail (e.g. from ordered secondary structure) which would be difficult to resolve in the image. The example shown in Fig. 5a is an illustration of a diffraction pattern containing this type of information. Such diffraction patterns may be more informative than images in the respect that they are created before the electrons interfere and therefore are not degraded or limited in terms of resolution by effects of the CTF, described above. On the other hand: (i) they contain no phase information, (ii) they tend to be swamped out at low resolution by inelastic scatter, (iii) they do not allow one to select sensitively for the

[Page 10]

L.A. AMOS, R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWn~

FIG. 5. Electron diffraction patterns from non-crystalline and crystalline specimens embedded in glucose and recorded with doses of < 0.5 el/At. (a) 4.7 A ring arising from cross B-structure in a T4 tail fibre aggregate (Earnshaw et al., 1979).

FI~. 5(b). Pattern from a thin crystal of catalase (unit cell dimensions 69 x 173 A). (Unwin, 1975; Unwin and Henderson, 1975.)

[Page 11]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

best areas of a specimen (as can be done, for example, by optical diffraction of micrographs). Also many specimens, because of their shape and size are not well suited to this technique (normally the illuminated area in electron diffraction is circular and of diameter >0.5 ~). Coherence is an important parameter when recording diffraction patterns. With typical illumination conditions for imaging (a 200 ~ condenser aperture and focused beam) the beam divergence at the specimen is ~ 10- 3 radians. This is inappropriate since it would give rise to a peak width in the diffraction plane of 10- 3/0.037 (= 1/27 A- 1), which is comparable to the spacing between peaks for most specimens. Very small divergences (< l0 s radians) are obtained by reducing the second condenser aperture size (to _<.50/~),very strongly exciting the first condenser lens and overfocussing the illumination on the specimen. It is then easily feasible to obtain peak widths of 1/10,000 A - t and smaller. It is important to make the diffraction peaks sharp to optimize the signal/noise ratio. Diffraction patterns are simple to record. The size of the patch of illumination on the specimen can be varied by adjusting the strength of the second condenser lens (it is not necessary to use the selected area diffraction facility to do this--nor is it desirable in low dose work to illuminate anything other than the area of interest). The camera length (determining the magnification of the diffraction pattern) can be varied over a wide range (up to ~ 150 m, in, for example, a Philips EM301) by adjusting the strengths of the projector lenses. Substantial preirradiation of the specimen can be avoided by searching at very low magnification as is done, for example, by putting the diffraction pattern a little out of focus. Typical exposure times are 10-100 sea

6. Experimental Recording of Micrographs Micrographs of biological specimens taken at medium magnifications (say 20-50,000 × ) give the best results in terms of minimizing radiation damage and providing good resolution (see Tables la and lb). At too high a magnification the use of very low doses (say 0.5 electrons/A 2 for unstained and l0 electrons/A 2 for stained specimens) leads to an image with an optical density (OD) little above fog level. At too low a magnification the optical transfer function of the photographic emulsion (or stray magnetic fields) may limit the resolution attainable. Numerous factors can adversely affect the quality of these micrographs. Most important are the following: (a) Alignment Only a very rough alignment of the projector and condenser lenses is necessary, but it is important to ensure that the illumination is both parallel to and centred on the axis of the objective lens and that this axis is imaged centrally on the viewing screen or photographic film. If this condition is obtained, changes in the objective lens current (with the deflectors switched off) will cause points of the image to rotate about a fixed point at the centre of the viewing screen.

Co) Vibrationsand stray magneticfields These both tend to cause a strongly directional loss in resolution. The former is usually most serious at the level of the specimen and therefore normally rotates with the image as the magnification is changed. Side-entry goniometers are especially prone to vibration problems. Stray magnetic fields, at medium magnification, are usually most serious at the level of the projection chamber (where the shielding in most microscopes is inadequate). The accompanying directional loss in resolution in this case therefore usually does not rotate as the magnification is changed. The effect of stray fields becomes more pronounced as the magnification is decreased (manufacturer's specifications apply only to high magnification

images). (C) Astiomatism Astigmatism is best corrected at high magnifications by observing the phase granularity in the carbon film. This has to remain rotationally symmetrical while going in and out of focus.

[Page 12]

L.A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN

The astigmatism setting tends to change near the edge of the grid or close to lumps of nonconducting matter, and when tilting to angles greater than about 30° . (d) Focus The aim of defocusing is to optimize the contrast from the object features of most interest. With negatively stained specimens underfocus values in the range 1000-10,000 A should usually achieve this aim. At greater underfocus the first zero in the CTF may appear at spacings larger than 20 A, thereby causing certain Fourier terms to be absent from the image or to contribute in reversed contrast (making corrections necessary--see later). With unstained specimens preserved to better resolution, similar restrictive criteria apply (although the need to make corrections may be unavoidable). It is preferable that images of them are not close to focus (since phase contrast is now the only contrast mechanism to enhance large object spacings) and not grossly far away (since resolution will then be worsened due to the effects of partial coherence). There are a number of methods of recording minimal and very low dose images. Usually, the initial step is to search for suitable specimens with a dim beam at a very low magnification so that the dose received while searching is negligible compared to that used in recording. A number of different procedures may then be used to focus and take the micrographs at higher magnification (Agar et al., 1958; Williams and Fisher, 1970; Unwin and Henderson, 1975). Short exposure times (2-4 sec) help to improve picture quality by decreasing the time during which slow movements of the specimen holder or drift of a carbon film that is too thin or broken can occur. IV. STRUCTURE D E T E R M I N A T I O N IN THREE DIMENSIONS To obtain the necessary number of views required for the determination of the threedimensional distribution of scattering matter, we require a number of electron micrographs taken with the specimen tilted at different angles with respect to the viewing direction (the direction of the electron beam). Each of the micrographs providing a different view of the structure actually gives a projected image since the depth of focus is very large. The micrographs are first analysed by densitometry and Fourier transformation, so that the Fourier components of the repeating unit cell ofthe crystal can be separated from noise in the image. The Fourier components of the repeating unit cell are arranged on a regular lattice, known as the reciprocal lattice. The information from each image in the form of amplitudes and phases of these Fourier components at the lattice points is then combined to build up a picture of the three dimensional transform of the crystal. This takes the form of a number of reciprocal lattice lines which extend perpendicular to the plane of the crystal (Fig. 6). Once the three-dimensional transform has been constructed, within the realm of reciprocal space allowed by the maximum available tilt angle, the structure is calculated by Fourier synthesis, using a standard crystallographic computer program. The overall procedure therefore involves four steps. Each of these steps has a number of aspects which are treated in further detail in the following sections of the review. (1) Collection of sufficient good electron micrographs at suitably distributed viewing angles, using an appropriately prepared specimen. (Section V.) (2) Analysis of each image of the crystal into Fourier components discarding, or "filtering out", the noise. (Section VI.) (3) Combination of the amplitudes and phases from each image to provide measurements of the continuous transform at regular intervals along the lattice lines. (Section VII.) (4) Calculation of the structure as a three-dimensional distribution of scattering matter. (Section VIII.) First, we cover a few basic definitions. 1. Two-Dimensional Crystal Terminology We normally understand a crystal to be a structure which is arranged with identical unit cells repeated throughout space in three independent directions. By analogy, we can also talk

[Page 13]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

c_'.W-

/central

section

(" TILT AXIS

FIG. 6. A schematic diagram showing the transform of a two-dimensionalcrystal. It takes the form of a number of lattice lines extending perpendicular to the plane of the crystal. Each micrograph contains an image which, when Fourier transformed, gives the values of amplitude and phase at points along the lattice lines where the central section (perpendicular to the viewing direction) intersects them.

of two-dimensional crystals and one-dimensional crystals. A two-dimensional crystal is a planar arrangement of unit cells, which can be thought of as one layer of unit cells out of a three-dimensional crystal. Similarly a one-dimensional crystal would be a row of unit ceils. We normally consider the physical crystal to be made up of unit cells which contain identical real molecules. This distinguishes it from various mathematical concepts.

2. Mathematical Concepts and Terms The lattice, for example, is the repeating distribution of points in space which describes the position of the unit cells of the crystal. The combination of a lattice with various symmetry elements (e.g. two-fold, three-fold, four-fold and six-fold axes, mirror planes, glide planes, screw axes, etc.) gives rise to space groups which can be used to classify different arrangements of structure to fill space.

3. Space Groups and Plane Groups There are 240 three-dimensional space groups. Any three-dimensional crystal of a real molecule will have the symmetry of one of these space groups. In two dimensions the mathematical equivalent of the 3D space groups are the 17 two-dimensional plane groups, which provide a complete description of the symmetries allowed in a two-dimensional distribution for example on the surface of a sheet of paper. The plane groups have no information except in a single plane. They are often called the one-sided plane groups as a result. The proper mathematical description of the allowed symmetries of two-dimensional crystals occurs with the so-called two-sided plane groups, which allow the two sides of a plane to be distinguished (e.g. a top and a bottom). This introduces a third vectorial direction and allows the description of the symmetry of real molecules. This additional information from the two sides makes possible a total of 80 two-sided plane groups, or two-dimensional space groups. Most real molecules, however, especially those of biological origin, can never be related to one another by mirror planes, glide planes or centres of inversion because they are optically asymmetric or chiral. Only 17 of the two-dimensional space groups are thus possible, and for these 17 there is a unique relationship to the 17 plane groups (see Table 2). However, it is possible for a two-dimensional crystal which has a certain projection (or plane group) symmetry, to have a lower symmetry when analysed fully in the third dimension. For example, a crystal with two molecules in the unit cell related by a combined two fold rotation and translation along the two fold axis, where the axis is perpendicular to the plane of the lattice, would have a space group o f p l and a plane group of p2 (i.e. projection symmetry of p2). While this is unusual, it occurs frequently enough to be worth remembering. JPB 39:3 - D

[Page 14]

L. A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN TABLE2. THE 17~"Two-SIDEDPLANEGROUPSALLOWEDFOR BIOLOGICALMOLECULES Two-sided plane groups* pl p21 p12 p121 c12 p222 p2221 p22121 c222 p4 p422 p4212 p3 p312 p321 p6 p622

Corresponding 3-dimensional space group

Projection symmetry

P1 P2 (c-axisunique) P2 (b-axis unique) P2t C2 P222 P2221 P22121 C222 P4 P422 P42~2 P3 P312 P321 P6 P622

pl p2 pm Pg cm pmm pmg pgg cmm p4 p4m p4g p3 p3ml p31m p6 p6m

* Weuse here the nomenclaturefor the two-sidedplanegroups proposed by Holser (1958).This nomenclaturehas the following main rules. (a) Celltype is indicatedfirst by a small letter,p or c (primitive or centred). (b) The axisperpendicularto the planeis alwayschosenas the z-axis. (c) The symmetryalong this axis is always described by the first symbol followingthe cell type. i" There are 80 two-sidedplane groups in total, of which the 17 given here are the only ones not containing inversion centres or mirror or glide planes.

V. T H E E L E C T R O N M I C R O G R A P H S

1. Stained or Unstained Specimens It is clear from Section III that there is an almost infinite variety of ways to carry out electron microscopy (involving stained or unstained specimens, different embedding or support media, minimization of electron beam damage, tilt series from single areas, lower dose tilted views from separate areas and so on). We assume here that as a result of preliminary investigations, the experimenter has decided on the procedure he wishes to use. The interpretation of the final distribution of scattering material will depend on this choice. For example if low-dose images of unstained specimens are used, the final map will represent the distribution of atoms in the molecules of the crystal. If specimens stained with heavy metal salts such as uranyl acetate are used, the map will represent the distribution of the heavy atoms with negligible contributions from the structure itself.

2. Optimal Defocus As mentioned before, a good image of a stained specimen will be well focused when the image is between I00 and 10,000 A under-focusecL This is because the phase contrast produced by underfocusing has the same sign at resolutions of interest as the amplitude contrast and the two contrast mechanisms work together. An oveffocused image on the other hand is more complicated to interpret. If the image is too highly underfocused the C T F varies too quickly and may at higher resolution produce Fourier components with reversed contrast. Although more sophisticated analysis of images from stained specimens is possible, to eliminate completely the effects of the overall C T F (made up of both amplitude and phase contrast), this should not be necessary because one can record micrographs of stained specimens with

[Page 15]

3-D structure determinationby electr6n microscopyof 2-D crystals

FIG. 7, Tilted and untilted views of Sulfolobus cell wall fragmentsnegativelystained with sodium phosphotungstate. Tilt angles were (a) + 53°; (h)0°; (c) -57 °.

FIG. 7(b).

CTF's which are essentially uniform to the resolution set by the specimen preservation. The approximate determination of the stain distribution available directly from well-focused images uncorrected for the effects of the CTF is therefore usually quite adequate (Erickson and Klug, 1971). Figure 7 gives some examples of micrographs of a tilted specimen, in which the level of defocus and its change across the tilted specimen can be clearly seen.

[Page 16]

L, A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN

Fla. 7(c).

3. Correction for CTF in Images of Untilted Specimens Images of unstained specimens may contain much higher resolution information, however, and if this is the case, close attention to the determination of the CTF and correction for its effects is essential The determination of CTF in very low dose images is carried out by recording a high dose image immediately after the low dose exposure (Fig. 8a, b). Optical diffraction of the high dose image (see Fig. 8d) reveals the so-called Thon rings (Thon, 1966), which determine the positions of the maxima and minima of the CTF. The amplitudes and phases of the Fourier components of the structure can then be corrected using the calculated values of the CTF at the particular level of defocus found from the high-dose image, Often this will not provide as accurate an estimate of the amplitudes of the Fourier components as can be obtained by electron diffraction. The combination of electron diffraction and low dose microscopy of unstained objects may therefore be the best approach. Astigmatism is best kept small, particularly in images requiring correction for the effects of the CTF. If it occurs to a serious extent in an image which is to be corrected for the CTF, different CTF's must be applied in each direction in the diffraction pattern. 4. Correction for CTF in Images of Tilted Specimens The correction for CTF in images of large areas of a tilted specimen, for which high resolution information is required, is a special procedure. Since the different parts of the specimen are at different heights relative to the objective lens, they will have different degrees of underfocus (or overfocus) and different CTF's. Thus for a particular spatial frequency, different parts of the image will have different contrast (positive and negative and also of different strengths). The whole image must therefore be multiplied point by point by the appropriate value for the contrast for each different spatial frequency before being separately Fourier transformed. This is normally done once for each point required in the transform of the image of the crystal. Some computing time can be saved by densitometry of the images of these tilted specimens parallel to the tilt axis, and applying the CTF correction (different for each point) to the data after performing the first dimension of Fourier transformation in the direction parallel to the tilt axis. The result of this procedure is illustrated in Fig. 9. However, for tilted images of stained specimens, this special procedure is not necessary since the

[Page 17]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

FIG. 8. (a) and (b) are "low" dose ( ~ 1 el/A2) and "high" dose (normal exposure, i.e. ~ 10 el/A2) images of unstained purple membrane embedded in glucose; the crystalline array of bacteriorhodopsin molecules cannot be detected by eye in either image because of the very low contrast. The dark spots are gold particles which were added to the specimen as a focusing aid.

resolution of the stained image is low and the area that needs to be measured small. The contrast therefore does not vary much across such an image.

5. The Number of Tilted Images Required to Define the Three-Dimensional Transform Accurately This depends on the required resolution, the type of data collection (e.g. tilt series, or randomly placed individual tilts), the symmetry of the crystal (e.g. p622 requires many (12 x ) fewer pictures than pl) and the thickness of the specimen (Crowther et al., 1970). The higher the resolution and the thicker the specimen, the more data are required. For a structure about

[Page 18]

L.A. AMOS, R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN

FIG. 8 (c) and (d) are optical diffractionpatterns from large areas of low and high dose imagesof the crystal. (c) shows the presenceof the lattice in the form of a hexagonal array of spots, whereas in (d) the spots are gone due to radiation damage, being replaced by the Thon ring pattern from the carbon substrate, which was too weak to see in (c).

100 .~ thick, to a resolution of 20/~, sampling in a tilt series every 10 ° should be adequate. This would be 13 images to cover the tilt range - 6 0 ° to + 6 0 ° . This single tilt series would probably be quite sufficient to define the entire 3D-transform of a p622 crystal (apart from the "missing c o n e " - - s e e later) because of the symmetry, which gives essentially 12 different views of the molecules in each unit cell. On the other hand, for a crystal of lower symmetry (e.g. p l or p2), three or four tilt series would probably be required, and perhaps five or six desirable. Perhaps the best a p p r o a c h is simply to keep adding images until there is a g o o d degree of redundancy, especially for noisy data. There are few structures for which the recording and analysis of the images is the rate-determining step.

[Page 19]

3-D structuredeterminationby electronmicroscopyof 2-D crystals

CORRECTION FOR FOCUS ,GRADIENT

( 1 , 2 ) REFLECTION 4~ DEQREES TILT 7$ee~ NERN UNDERFOCU5

BEFORE CORRECTION

~

~

0 0 1 6 6 7 1 5 1 4 1 1

~

RFTER CORRECTION

,

,

$

?

6 1 0 3 6 2 ~ 2 0 t 2 1 ,

~

,

FIG. 9. Calculated amplitudes at a typical spot in the transform of a tilted imago, before (a) and after Co)correction for the contrast transfer function, which varies considerably across the image due to the varying height of the specimen.

6. Optical Diffraction in the Evaluation of Images Before getting heavily involved in the computer analysis of images by densitometry and Fourier transformation, it is always an advantage to spend considerable time in the evaluation and selection of the best images by optical diffraction (see examples in Fig. 8). In practice, optical diffraction is extremely valuable at many stages of the procedures, from the initial checking of microscope performance (for example, with pictures of amorphous carbon films), to preliminary evaluation of images to see which ones include arras of specimen preserved to high resolution (other images are discarded), and finally, to the selection of which areas of an image are to be subjected to computer analysis. For the purposes of selection of areas of images which are to be used for analysis of the structure of 2D crystals, there are a number of useful criteria. (a) The resolution, degree of undeffocus and astigmatism can be seen immediately from the Then rings arising from the amorphous background--whether it is from the background of heavy metal stain or from a high dose image of the amorphous carbon Co) The diffraction spots should be very sharp and go out to the highest required resolution. If the spots are blurred in any way (fuzzy or streaked), it indicates distortions or variability in the periodicity of the unit cell dimensions of the crystal. If the spots are not sharp, possibly selection of a smaller area for diffraction will give better homogeneity. (c) If the specimen has internal symmetry, this can be used to check preservation during the preparation of the sample for electron microscopy. For example, a two-fold axis in the plane of the specimen should produce good mirror symmetry in the optical diffraction Patterns. A two-fold screw axis should, in addition, show systt~natic absences along the axis in question. If the specimen is unequally stained on the top and bottom surfac,~, or if the specimen is distorted (e.g. squashed) on the surface in contact with the carbon film, the symmetry will be poor, and systematic absences present.

[Page 20]

L. A. AMOS, R. HENDERSON and P. N. T. UNWIN

untilted

5:3° tilt

~~!~:iili ̧'

FIG. 10(a). Optical diffraction patterns from images of the same specimen of Sulfolobuscell wall untilted and tilted through 53°. Clearly, a great deal of time can be saved by rejection of images at the stage of optical diffraction. The areas of densitometry and computer processing are usually finally selected by moving a mask of the required size slowly over the best areas of the image while observing the resulting optical diffraction pattern. The best areas, by the above criteria, can then be analysed by the more time-consuming computer methods. Whether optical diffraction is an adequate criterion for the selection of suitable areas of image, or whether computer processing is needed for more detailed evaluation, needs to be decided for each new specimen. VI. ANALYSIS OF EACH IMAGE INTO F O U R I E R C O M P O N E N T S

1. Transform of an Image of 2-D Crystal The digitized image of a perfect two-dimensional crystal, when subjected to Fourier transformation by computer, consists of a series of diffraction peaks having an amplitude and phase (see DeRosier and Moore, 1970). The amplitudes and phases represent the Fourier components of the scattering matter in the crystal. Also present in the transform of an electron micrograph are Fourier components which arise from the carbon support film and electron noise from the electronic quanta. This "background noise" is distributed throughout reciprocal space and only a small fraction falls on the points occupied by the crystallographic diffraction peaks--the reciprocal lattice points. By making a record of the amplitudes and phases of the crystallographic reflections only, we effectively eliminate the background from other sources. This is equivalent to averaging the density in all the unit cells of the image. Thus any statistical disorder or orientational disorder of individual molecules is averaged out and the result is the structure of an average unit cell. 2. Extraction of Amplitudes and Phases of Fourier Components and Calculation of 2-D Filtered Images In practice, the area of an image to be analysed must first be converted into a two-dimensional array of optical densities by digitization in a densitometer. This is covered in Appendix II. The Fourier transform of the digitized image is then calculated in the form of another two-dimensional array, of complex numbers in this case. After correcting for the contrast transfer function (see Section V), if necessary, amplitudes and phases at crystallographic reciprocal lattice points are extracted from the array. The process of determining the location of these points is described in some detail below. The end result is a list of numbers (h, k, A, ~b) which give the index of each spot and the values of its amplitude

[Page 21]

3-D structure determination by electronmicroscopyof 2-D crystals

FIG.10(b).Electrondiffractionpatterns takenfromuntiltedand tiltedspecimensofpurplemembrane. and phase. The amplitude is measured in units of (optical density difference x area) and the phase in degrees. However, the exposure and degree of underfocus of the image are not normally determined accurately, so the amplitude is often in arbitrary units. At this stage, a filtered image of the structure (or projected view, as in the individual micrograph) can be calculated simply by carrying out the reverse two=dimensional Fourier transform of the data at the reciprocal lattice points. This is usually done only in the case of untilted views, in which the projected symmetry can be examined.

3. Refinement of Parameters of Reciprocal Lattice In practice, for each new transformed image, a good procedure for extracting the relevant data is to have a preliminary look and to note down the coordinates of all the strong spots. The parameters of the reciprocal lattice (x* y*) coordinates of the (1, 0) and (0, 1) are then

[Page 22]

L . A . AMOS, R. HENDERSON a n d P. N . T. UNWON

determined by a least squares refinement using the coordinates of these spots (e.g. Table 3). The transform can then be examined more carefully and amplitudes and phases for all spots, including the weak ones not used in the lattice parameter refinement, determined. Often a more detailed examination will reveal high resolution spots not exactly on the initially refined lattice. In cases like this, a second refinement of the lattice parameters incorporating the coordinates of some of the high resolution spots, in which there is now increased confidence, may be useful. Amplitudes and phases of all spots should be determined at the exact predicted positions of the refined lattice rather than at apparently stronger, nearby, TABLE 3.

x*, y* D e v i a t i o n s

h, k I n d i c e s

- 0.21 0.09 0.01 0.16 - 0.42 0.34 - 0.24 0.08 0.21 - 0.09 0.13 - 0.15 0.20 0.18 -0.20 0.03 -0.23 -0.15 0.17 0.10 - 0.18 0.36 0.32 - 0.26 0.09 - 0.07 -0.33 - 0.11 0.12 - 0.24 0.08 - 0.06 0.16 0.29 - 0.09 0.23 0.01 -0.17 0,06 - 0,12 - 0,15 0.25 - 0.12 - 0.18 0.15

0.46 0.10 -0.13 - 0.29 0.08 -0.02 - 0.05 - 0.08 0.29 0.08 - 0.00 - 0.03 -0.09 0.07 0.14 0.11 -0.05 0.22 - 0.01 0.26 - 0.17 - 0.23 -0.33 - 0.06 -0.12 - 0.18 0.15 - 0.08 0.09 0.03 - 0.20 0.20 -0.13 0.24 0.11 0.18 0.34 -0.08 0.09 - 0.21 0.00 - 0.16 0.21 - 0.11 0.26

X*, y* C o o r d i n a t e s input

x*, y* C o o r d i n a t e s calculated

- 47.00 - 48.80 -44.40 - 35.90 - 31.00 -41.90 - 37.00 - 33.00 -28.80 - 30.00 - 25.90 - 21.30 - 13.00 - 18.80 - 14.10 - 10.00 - 1.10 -7.00 - 3.00 1.40 6.00 14.10 4.00 8.90 17.20 26.00 11.80 15.90 20.00 29.00 33.00 23.00 27.10 31.30 36.00 40.00 34.40 38.90 43.00 46.00 59.00 57.10 61.80 69.00 73.00

- 47.21 - 48.71 -44.39 - 35.74 - 31.42 -41.56 - 37.24 - 32.92 -28.59 - 30.09 - 25.77 - 21.45 - 12.80 - 18.62 - 14.30 - 9.97 - 1.33 -7.15 - 2.83 1.50 5.82 14.46 4.32 8.64 17.29 25.93 11.47 15.79 20.12 28.76 33.08 22.94 27.26 31.59 35.91 40.23 34.41 38.73 43.06 45.88 58.85 57.35 61.68 68.82 73.15

44,00 12,10 23.80 46.90 58.00 2.90 14.40 25.90 37.00 4.95 16.50 28.00 51.00 7,10 18.50 30.00 53.10 9.10 20.80 32.00 43.90 66.90 11.80 23.00 46.00 69.00 2.00 13.70 25.00 48.00 59.70 4.10 15.90 27.00 38.60 50.00 6.10 18.00 29.30 8.80 43.00 10.90 22.00 13.0(3 24.10

these n u m b e r s were typed into c o m p u t e r (coordinates of strong spots) Lattice d i m e n s i o n s are: (11.47; 2.15), (4,32; l l . 4 7 ) - - - t h e s e are refined lattice paramelers. L e n g t h o f a* 11.670; a n g l e 10.608 degrees. L e n g t h o f b* 12.258; a n g l e 69.352 degrees. Included a n g l e 58,744 degrees.

44.46 12.20 23.67 46.61 56.08 2.88 14.35 25.82 37.29 5.03 16.50 27.97 50.91 7.17 18.64 30.11 53.05 9.32 20.79 32.26 43.73 66.67 11.47 22.94 45.88 68.82 2.15 13.62 25.09 48,03 59,50 4.30 15.77 27.24 38.71 50.18 6.44 17.92 29.39 8.59 43.00 10.74 22.21 12.89 24.36

[Page 23]

3-D structuredeterminationby electronmicroscopyof 2-D crystals

transform points which lie off the refined lattice, even when the stronger point seems to be tantalisingly close.

4. Shape of Diffraction Spots If the crystal is perfect and the image well recorded over the entire measured area (the box), the diffraction maxima will have a shape due to the truncation ofthe lattice at the edges of the measured box. This function, the transform of the box itself, has the form of a (sin ~x*/Trx*) or sinc function, so that the ampfitude of the diffracted intensity falls to zero and then becomes negative as the distance from the exact reciprocal lattice point increases. This happens in both x and y directions giving a spot shape proportional to ((sin ~x*/Trx). (sin 7~y*/Tty*))(see Fig. 11). If the normal sampling of the Fourier transform is then used (giving the same number of sample points in Fourier space as in the original real image), this (sin 7rx*/~x*) function will fall to zero at exactly one transform step (x* -- 1) from the reciprocal lattice point. Thus the central maximum of the (sin ~x*/Ttx*) function can be distributed over 1, sometimes 2 or sometimes 4 points of the transform, depending on the registration between the reciprocal lattice point of the crystal and the points of the transform of the scanned area of the image. In a perfect crystal, the phase can simply be read offany of the 1, 2 or 4 points in the central maximum (it should be the same ffthe phase origin is chosen to be at the centre of the box). Of course, there will always be a little noise, so the (weighted) average of these points is usually used. More sophisticated analyses might fit a least squares (sin 7tx*/Ttx*) function to each reciprocal lattice point (Roberts et aL, 1981). In practice, the phase is usually determined well enough by the experimenter's reading it off the printed Fourier transform, and the amplitude from, for example, the square root of the sum of the squares of the observed transform amplitudes on the few transform points near the reciprocal lattice point (Fig. 12). A more exact procedure, which is computationally more expensive, involves sampling reciprocal space more finely, by transforming a larger area than the area of crystalline sample to be measured. This can be done by filling out a larger box around the measured area with a constant density equal to the average of the densities within the measured area (see DeRosier and Moore, 1970). The central maximum of the (sin ~x*/~tx*) function is then spread over a larger number of transform points, so that there will always be a point very near to the centre of the diffraction maximum for each reciprocal lattice point. The amplitudes and phases can then be obtained from this central maximum. Alternatively, the digitized image may be interpolated (Aebi et al., 1973; Smith, 1978) to be sampled at exact fractions of the lattice spacing, so that the transform maxima fall exactly on reciprocal lattice sample points.

5. Distortions and Defects in Real Crystals So far we have assumed the existence of a specimen in the form of a perfectly ordered twodimensional crystal lying completely fiat on a carbon substrate. Of course, no real specimen is like this. It may contain many types of disorder, either positional, orientational or statistical disorder both of the individual molecules and of the lattice. For example, there may be crystallographic faults such as dislocations and various kinds of point defects. There may be

FIG. 1 I. The shape of the 2-D ~

~ l ¢ t i ~ ((sin ~*/~*).(sin ~Y°I~Y*)).

[Page 24]

L.A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T, UNwrN

FIG. 12. Transformof area around a typicalspot. The top grid showstranstorm amplitudesand the bottom the phases in units of 10°. The peak is clearlycentredbetweenfour of the nearest transform points. The phase ( ~ 185°) is flat over the peak showingalmost no phase gradient. The subsidiary -ve and +ve fringesshow the expectedtheoreticalsinc functionbehaviour (cf. Fig. 11). bending and stretching of the lattice and flat crystals may be curled up or ruckled. The analysis of the Fourier components of such imperfect crystals can only be as good as the degree of order present initially, and our understanding of it. For real crystals, the diffraction spots most commonly deviate from the theoretical (sin nx*/nx*) shape because of bent lattices or uneven staining or preservation. Bent lattices cause the diffraction spots to be stretched out so that different parts of the image contribute to different parts of the diffraction spot. The diffraction spot then begins to be stretched or to have internal structure and the phases may become meaningless, conveying information about the nature of the bending rather than the structure of the molecules. Although several attempts have been made to unbend lattices and correct for distortions of the specimen, they have not yet been successful in yielding significant new information (Crowther and Sleytr, 1977). For the moment, the best advice on encountering such difficulties is either to improve the specimen so that such defects do not occur, or to use smaller (and therefore more coherent) areas of image in the transformation. In the case of a micrograph which continues to give difficulty, these various kinds of specimen distortions or defects may make the Fourier processing impossible.

6. Uneven Staining or Preservation Uneven staining is probably not a significant difficulty. Since good areas of an image are normally selected by optical diffraction (see p. 201), to give strong, sharp diffraction spots extending to as high a resolution as possible, the area used in the transform of an unevenly stained specimen will probably be stained more strongly in the centre of the boxed-off area (but, see below). The effect of this on the transform is to give a larger diffraction spot (the (sin 7tx*/zcx*) function falls off more slowly) arising from the essentially smaller area contributing to the image. Thus, instead of the central maximum of (sin ltx*/~x*) extending over only 1, 2 or 4 transform points, it might extend over 6 points, and have no deafly defined reversal due to the sharp edge to the box. Often it is also found that the low resolution spots will be well-behaved and give a good approximation to the theoretical (sin nx*/nx*) function, but that higher resolution spots are

[Page 25]

3-D structuredeterminationby electronmicroscopyof 2-D crystals

distorted or otherwise less well behaved. This is due to parts of the measured image being better preserved or stained at high resolution than others. It is often also the case that the refined lattice parameters are slightly different using the high resolution spots when compared to the low resolution spots. Again, this must be due to slight incoherence of different areas of the specimen, some of which are also better preserved than others.

7. Phase Gradients Across Spots The existence of phase gradients within the central maximum of the (sin nx*/nx*) peak is another frequent occurrence. This is often due to the best preserved or stained area being at the edge of the box. Normally the phase origin is set to be in the middle of the measured box, so that a slight error in the lattice parameters, causing the reciprocal lattice point to be moved slightly, will not significantly affect the determination of the phase. However, if the middle of the best area of the image is not in the middle of the box, then a phase gradient across the central maximum of the spot will be observed, often in the same direction and of the same magnitude on all of the spots. The best solution to this problem is to take care to position the box accurately over a good area of the image while still trying to find a big enough area to fill the box completely. Alternatively, the use of a smaller area of the image may be the only solution.

8. Application of Crystallooraphic Symmetry If the image is a projection of the structure perpendicular to the sheet, it may be possible to apply the crystallographic symmetry (e.g. a six-fold axis perpendicular to the sheet) to the measured data and produce a more accurate map of the projected structure. This amounts to introducing further molecular averaging (of molecules within the unit cell) by rotation, in addition to the translational averaging of all the unit cells in the crystal. This application of the crystallographic symmetry to the projected image can be done either to the computed density in real space, or by averaging of the Fourier components in reciprocal space. In either case, the symmetry axes must of course be accurately located within the unit cell.

9. Phase Origin Refinement in Projection The axis or axes can either be located by a real space correlation function, looking for a maximum correlation in densities, or in reciprocal space by minimizing the phase discrepancy between symmetry-related reflections as the phase-origin is moved. The phase origin (the position in the original image with respect to which the phases of its Fourier components are calculated) can easily be moved to search for a symmetry element by the equivalent in real space of, for example, a 1° change in the phase of the (1, 0) spot in reciprocal space. This is an actual movement of the phase origin by ~oth of the unit cell dimension along the a axis, and produces a 1° change in phase for all spots with inuex h = 1, a 2 ° change for h = 2, etc. Thus the phase origin can be moved around until it coincides in position with a real symmetry element of the crystal. At that point there will be the best agreement between the phases of symmetry related spots and the best correlation in real space of the densities in the computed map of the structure. We normally call this procedure the phase origin refinement in projection (see Fig. 13) to distinguish it from phase origin refinement in three-dimensions (Section VII) where the phases of a new image are to be merged with those of previous images whose phase origins have already been refined. 10. Space Group Determination in Projection Initially for a new crystal, the space group may not be known, although a good guess can usually be made from the symmetry of the optical diffraction pattern. Even so, unless the image also has high contrast and is well preserved, it may not be possible to determine by inspection whether, for example, the symmetry is p3 or pt. In such cases, a suitable statistical test can usually be derived to be applied to the phases after the phase origin has been refined using the lowest known symmetry. In this example, if the space group was p6, it would be possible to find one three-fold axis for which all reflections had phases equal to 0 ° or 180°

[Page 26]

L.A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNwn~

within experimental error; if the space group was p3, however, the phases would take any value. VII. COMBINATION

O F I M A G E S T O F O R M 3-D T R A N S F O R M

Once the list of h, k, A, qbfor each tilted image has been obtained, the data can be compared to those from other images. F o r each of the images the list of amplitudes and phases of the spots represents the sampling of the three-dimensional transform at the points on the central section of reciprocal space shown as the large filled symbols in Fig. 6. T o determine the

agreementbetween the phases of the two sets of data beingcompared:0 means a phase residual of 80° or worse, I means from 70° to 80°, etc. Thus, the correct origin in this ease agrees to better than 30° (24.75°) with the previous data.

[Page 27]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

position of each of these points in three-dimensions, the value Of z*, the distance of the data point along the h, k lattice line, needs to be calculated. To do this, the angle of tilt and the position of the tilt axis of the specimen for each image need to be known. Several methods for the determination of the tilt angle and tilt axis are given in Appendix I. Using the values determined, a new list comprising h, k, z*, A, ~ is created for the new image and this can then be added to the 3-D transform (which at this stage is simply kept in the form of a combined list of all the amplitudes and phases) once the scale factor and the position of the common phase origin are determined. Some examples of the resultant transforms obtained on a few lattice lines of several different specimens are shown in Figs. 14-20. In practice the image combination is carried out by a single computer program which performs both the amplitude scaling and phase origin refinement. l. Determination of Scale Factor The scale is determined simply by comparing the amplitudes, A, from the new image with all those from previous images (already scaled) with the same h, k and similar values of z* (for Az* interval used, see below). Normally, scale factors are determined accurately enough from just a few spots, and are seldom in error.

6O(

4ooi

•

,,,,

~o~

It ~,

]

]

3O(

I: o "

9 'i

, ;Ji

o~

:,~'[l-'] ÷o~,

FZG. 14. Values of intensity and phase along two lattice lines from purple membrane, obtained respectively from electron diffraction patterns and computed from images. Amplitudes can also b¢ obtained from the Fourier-transformed image, but less accurately (Henderson and Unwin, 1975). 04 I

i Q

-

~

90 °

-0,01

z" (,~-'1

270°

0.01

z*(£')

FIG. 15. Amplitudes and phases along the (1, 1) and (2, 3) lattice lines of cytochrome oxidas© crystals stained with uranyl acetate. The data were combined in space group p121. (From Henderson et al., 1977.)

[Page 28]

L . A . AMOS, R. HENDERSON a n d P, N . T. UNWIN

(2,0)

(1,1)

ol.

•

..~.:

.../....

)

/

<

\

•

.

( 36C

•e

• 9O

-'02

-'01

"01

"02

-'02

Z'(~, 4)

'01

Z'(.~ -~)

FIG. 16. T w o lattice lines f r o m u r a n y l acetate s t a i n e d d e o x y c h o l a t e - c y t o c h r o m e ( F r o m Fuller et al., 1979.)

(1,3)

. o°o

.o.-~-o oo o

°

o~ ° °

o x i d a s e crystals.

(2,4)

) ~ % Q - ~oo oo

° o ° o...,r-o- ° ' 0 " - ' - " " - ~

,<

"02

o ° °

~

~

ael,

o)'°a°-1lg~a.o~_~_°_Oo~°a°--~---~,o - o o oo a

oo o ¢1 180 =

O~o °

"~o,

0°

Z * (,~-I)

FIG. 17. A m p l i t u d e a n d p h a s e s a l o n g s o m e lattice lines or u r a n y l a c e t a t e s t a i n e d r i b o s o m e s ( U n w i n , 1977). (a) T w o t y p i c a l lattice lines.

2. Determination of Common 3-D Phase Origin The position of the common three-dimensional phase origin in each image is then found by the following procedure. The idea is to move the phase origin of each new image until the phases of the new spots all agree as closely as possible with those of the corresponding old spots with similar values of z*, whose phases have been obtained from previous images. The position of the phase origin in the first image to be included in the three-dimensional set defines two coordinates of the 3-D origin, which will be used eventually for all the images. Normally, one starts with an untilted picture, whose phase origin can most easily be moved to the conventional crystallographic origin. Except in the case of space group p 1, for which any image and any origin could be used to begin with (since there is no symmetry), it is convenient (in practice essential) that the phase origin should be on the crystallographically conventional origin for the space group.

[Page 29]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopyof 2-D crystals

(0,1)

(0,8)

(0,R)

!

oot

< 100

ol

Sd

o"

.

o~

~o

D10

Z *f (A'I)

FIG.17(b).The (0, k) latticelines.Heredata are presentedboth fromimagesoftiltedribosomecrystals (fullline)and fromedge-onviewsofsuperimposedtetramersin ,-.2000A thicksections(brokenline). The data from the edge-on viewswere adjusted to givethe best fit with the data from the tilting experiments, the differencebetweenpositiveand negativestaining being accounted for by a 1800 phase change.The (0, 0) latticeline couldthen be obtainedat the correctscalefrom the edge-onview alone. This is done so that the standard phase relationships can be used to transform the observed spots into a single asymmetric unit of the space group, allowing all possible phase comparisons to be made. This should result in 'the most accurate origin determination. In addition, for space groups with centrosymmetric zones, the additional constraint that certain reflections be real (phase 0 ° or 180°), or imaginary (phase 90 ° or 270 °) can produce a more accurate origin refinement. The phase origin of the three-dimensional data will be at the crystallographically conventional origin. This should always be in the middle of the specimen vertically. Even in space groups with no crystallographic, ally defined z-origin, such as pl, p2, p3, I>4 and 1>6, the origin will still end up roughly in the middle of the crystal vertically, because of the procedure of comparing phases of closely spaced spots along z* and looking for the best agreement. This minimizes the z* phase gradients taken over all lattice lines, thus putting the phase origin approximately at the centre of the scattering density.

3. How Closely Spaced Need Spots be in z* ? Since the transform is continuous along the vertical lattice lines, the question arises ofhow close two determinations of the phase (or the ampfitude) should be in the z direction before they can be considered the same. This depends on the thickness of the specimen, since the continuous transform will vary more rapidly for a thicker specimen. The distribution of scattering matter within the total thickness also alters the rate at which the transform can change. In practice, a separation of 1⁄4to ~rd of a reciprocal space separation of (1/thickness) seems to work, although some adjustment may be needed for particular specimens. The transform will vary more slowly for specimens with most of their contrast in one thin layer and faster for specimens with concentrations of scattering contrast in two layers at the top and bottom surfaces of the specimen. Since the distribution will not be known until later, an open mind should be maintained. If two images with widely separated tilt angles are refined together initially, only a few of the spots will be common to both images---those along the common line parallel to the tilt axis. Their relative phase origin will therefore be determined very poorly in the direction perpendicular to the tilt axis. Because of this, it is better to start by refining together images JPB

:~S):3 -

[Page 30]

L.A. AMOS, R. HENDERSON and P. N. T. UNWIN

~

°~

0~

°•o

o o o o

o°

o o o

°o~

ooo

.~

~

.~

°°

oS Cq . ~

!,

o °

Ooo

c~

oo 0

o oo

~~

Oo

° °

~

~.~ ~.~

0%

~N

oi

°

~Oo

°

@

. ~ ' ~ ~. ~

/

-:

2~" j'

°o

oo

•

°o ~

°

~Sg

[Page 31]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

alo

IK

~

•|

~4

•I

~

l,

° °

0.I

0.2

o.2

0.3

0.4

0.4

0,t

_ ] . 0.3

0.~

.

J . 0.4

(d)

(c)

e¢ 4¢ 0!

0~

O3

OL

(o)

(b)

.i"

3~ 3o¢

"'"

== "

• ".'* .L.''

'1~.2

"0.1

" "O-4 "0.3

".f'~. ",. ".

": !

..

2.1

"" l

(e

*

• .

2.3

"O.4

-0.$

*0.~-

0.1

-0.t

(g)

o,~

0.3

0-4

"0.4

"0,3

-0"~

2.2 0;1

-o-1

o.~

0-3

¢r.4

(h)

FIG. 19. Amplitudes and phases obtained from uranyl acetate stained Zn-tubulin sheets (Amos and Baker, 1979a). The filled symbols were derived from images of tilted crystals. The open symbols were derived by analysing images of sections taken perpendicular to the plane of the sheet. The (0, 0) lattice line was also obtained from these transverse sections. Here z* is in nm-1.

having only small differences in tilt. Since one usually starts with an untilted picture, it follows that all images with small tilt angles should be refined together first, adding those of medium tilt next, and ending with the highly tilted images once there is a body of three-dimensional data already created, against which the highly tilted images can be accurately refined. This procedure does work well in practice. If there are inadequate data for the refinement of the origin of a new image, this will show up in the form of the absence of a clear minimum in the origin refinement map which plots the agreement between the new phases and those from previous images, as the origin is moved. The experimenter must then add more images with smaller tilt angles, before returning to the image giving difficulty. There is one problem with this procedure. Any error in the z-coordinate of the origin, generated by inaccurate refinement of the first few images is likely to propagate and cause problems with later images. We attempt to alleviate this problem by a second (and often third) refinement of the origins of the first few images, after a bigger body of phase data has been accumulated. The most sophisticated treatments so far involve a final least squares refinement of all image origins against all other data until no further origin movements occur but these require that the origins be already fairly accurately known. Perhaps a more elegant overall procedure will be devised in the future. We thus end up with a set of combined data which samples the continuous threedimensional transform at a number of closely spaced points on the lattice lines.

[Page 32]

L.A. AMOS, R. H~DI~RSON and P. N. T. UNwlN

.~

~t ,,~

o,

,,~

1~.~ "

~ ~L

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

,

.... •

•

~

~

•

|,

.~:"

~s

~ ~,

?

•

,.,

•

¢)

[Page 33]

3-D structuredeterminationby electronmicroscopyof 2-D crystals

4. Absolute Hand of Structure Prior to calculation of the structure, the absolute hand of the structure should be determined. All this really amounts to is ensuring that the tilt angle of tilted views is recorded with the correct sign. In practice, all formulae for calculating z* from the tilt angle and tilt axis depend on both for the determination of the sign of z*, so that a change in direction of either will change z*. A good procedure for checking that the correct combination has been obtained is as follows: (a) Observe on which side of the tilt axis the image of a tilted specimen is more underfocused by looking to see which part exhibits the largest phase granularity. This part of the image is from an area of specimen lower in the microscope (since it is underfocused). The orientation of the specimen in the microscope is now known in absolute terms. (b) Find a suitable diffraction spot from the crystal which is clearly not along the tilt axis. (c) Using the definition of a and b axial directions from the indexing of the diffraction points used for the computer transform [Here it is most important to know the relationship between the direction on the image when it was densitometered and the direction in the computer Fourier transform.], determine whether the spot selected should have a + ve or - v e value of z*. This will be easy for crystallographers, who are used to thinking about the positions and directions of the principle axes of the crystal in 3-D. (d) The value of the tilt angle in the computed 3-D transform should be made + ve or - ve so that the value of z* for the selected spot agrees with this determination.

5. Space Group Determination in Three-Dimensions Finally, the determination of the space group cannot be completely certain until the threedimensional transform is known. Although, in most cases, the space group can be guessed from the symmetry of the optical diffraction patterns of untilted views, and further tests (e.g. between p3 and p6) applied to the projected view of the structure (see p. 207) either in real or reciprocal space, conclusive proof only comes when the 3-D transform is known to obey all the correct symmetry relations. This is the stage at which such tests can be applied. They involve using the lowest possible symmetry and testing to see whether amplitudes and phases contain any further relations predicted by the higher symmetries. Often, a structure will appear to have a lower symmetry than it should have. For example, in the case of the gap junction crystals which appear to have p622 symmetry, somewhat better agreement was found by assuming only p6 symmetry. The extra predicted relationships of p622 did not agree quite as well as expected from the degree of preservation of p6 symmetry. Since specimens are likely to be distorted where their surface is against the grid, this is the kind of effect which might have been expected. In such cases, it is up to the experimenter to decide whether he wishes simply to impose the full symmetry and look at the fully averaged structure, or to apply only the lower symmetry and look at the top and bottom surfaces separately. Sometimes, one or other surface will be better preserved, so application of the lower symmetry will give higher resolution results. Where the effect of the carbon support film on the structure of the specimen is to be investigated, care is needed at the time of the electron microscopy to record which side of the grid is uppermost in the microscope--the side with the specimen on it, or the opposite side. VIII. CALCULATION OF THE STRUCTURE Having combined all images in the right space group, to produce estimates of the continuous transform along each h, k lattice line, a list of amplitudes and phases can now be produced at discrete steps in z*, introducing the third index, l, as if the structure was a single unit cell of a three-dimensional crystal. Obviously the sampling should be fine enough to follow accurately any variation in the continuous transform. This is equivalent in real space to calculating a map of the scattering matter using a sufficientlylarge unit cell (sufficientlysmall steps in z*) so that the scattering matter in each sheet is well separated from that of the next

[Page 34]

L.A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN

periodically repeated sheet (which is artificially produced by the regular sampling of the transform).

1. Selection of Amplitudes and Phases of Continuous Transform The sampling of the continuous transform can either be done by hand, by drawing curves through the amplitude and phase data, or sinc functions (spaced at 1/thickness) can be fitted in the complex plane by a least squares computer program (Crowther et al., 1970). In practice, the data are often rather noisy and we have found it most satisfactory to draw curves by hand, trying to take into consideration the relationship between amplitude and phase in the complex plane. For example, the phases can obviously change more rapidly along z* when the amplitude is small. Correspondingly, when the amplitude is large, the phase is likely to be able to vary only rather slowly and smoothly. After sampling the continuous transform, the structure can then be calculated using a standard crystallographic Fourier program. We use a program written by G. Reeke for all 240 space groups; the appropriate 17 two-sided plane groups correspond exactly with 17 three-dimensional space groups. The c-axis cell dimension is put in as the reciprocal of the sampling distance along z* in the continuous transform. The distribution of scattering matter must then be interpreted knowing how the specimen was prepared (see next section, reviewing 3-D analyses of 2-D crystals). 2. Missing Cone Problem The absence of data above a certain tilt angle, the problem of the so-called "missing cone", is usually not serious. If tilts can be collected up to 60 °, then 87 ~o of reciprocal space is measured; at 70° it is 94 ~o. The main problem is that the intensities along the (0, 0) lattice line (0, 0, l) in the three-dimensional map will always be missing from data obtained by tilting. These intensities are often very strong and give rise to the mean density on each section across the thickness of the 2-D crystal. When they are left out, the mean density on each section is zero. If the final reconstructed 3-D image is to have the correct density profile, data must be obtained to fill this missing part of Fourier space. In the study of unstained purple membrane (Henderson and Unwin, 1975), information about the missing cone was obtained from X-ray diffraction patterns of hydrated specimens of stacked membranes. The patterns showed the diffracted intensity in the entire missing cone region to be relatively weak out to 7 A resolution, because of the nature of the bacteriorhodopsin substructure, with its axially featureless ~t-helical rods lying approximateiy perpendicular to the plane of the membrane. In this case, therefore, no significant error was introduced by setting this part of Fourier space to zero amplitude. In more recent studies, the missing cone has often been more-or-less ignored without real justification. In fact there are a number of solutions possible. As in the case of purple membrane, it may be possible to obtain X-ray diffraction results. Alternatively, the (0, 0, z*) or "profile" data can be determined from a thin section cut perpendicular to the plane of the sheet. Such studies are most easily carried out on positively stained sections of fixed and embedded material. However, Amos and Baker (1979b) were able to section embedded negatively stained specimens, in order to obtain data which would be more consistent with the tilted views. In this case, it was also possible to observe in favourable sections, other low order reflections in addition to the (0, 0, I). Another source of data comes from sheets which have fortuitously folded on the negatively stained grids and which therefore present views of the sheet from the side. This type of specimen was used in the case of gap junctions (Unwin and Zampighi, 1980). Figure 21 shows an example of a folded piece of Sulfolobus cell wall, which could provide some of the missing data for a full three-dimensional analysis of this structure (see later). Both the above procedures are somewhat liable to error since the quality of preservation and extent of the specimen in the viewing direction are difficult to evaluate and the scaling must be based on a relatively small amount of data in common with the three-dimensional data set. Experience so far suggests that the additional data obtained from side-on views are not crucial to interpretation of features in the three-dimensional maps. In practice, it seems to

[Page 35]

3-D structure determination by electronmicroscopyof 2-D crystals

Fie. 21. Electron micrograph of Sulfolobus cell wall fragments which have folded over on the negativelystainedgrid. ( × 108,000.)At the edgeofthe fold,a viewofthe densityprofileofthe cellwall is obtained. be important only in estimating the precise thickness of features perpendicular to the plane (e.g. the overall molecular dimensions in a stained specimen) and good estimates of these can often be made by shadowing the specimens from a single direction and measuring the length of the shadow. But in order to construct a three dimensional model at a fixed contour level, some form of (0, 0, l*) curve is necessary, even if it is only estimated or "gness-timated", for example from contrast plots such as those shown in Fig. 22. IX. E X P E R I E N C E S WITH 3-D ANALYSES OF 2-D CRYSTALS Since the initial application of the method to purple membrane patches (Henderson and Unwin, 1975), several other 2-D crystals have been studied by similar procedures (see Table 4), although in no case has the analysis been carried out to the same level of sophistication as for purple membrane, or approaching the same 7 A resolution. This is because the crystals have either not been sufficiently large or weil-ordered, or have not stood up so well to irradiation. In most cases, the restricted size of the coherent areas has meant that reasonable signal-to-noise levels have been achieved only with the greater contrast provided by negatively stained specimens. Under such conditions, resolution has been limited to about 20 A. The fidelity with which the stain follows the protein boundary at this resolution is probably disturbed both by positive staining and by the formation of small crystallites of stain during drying (and irradiation). With such limitations, it is scarcely worth going to higher resolutions even if occasionally the stain is ordered beyond this level.

1. Strategies for Data Collection Three-dimensional data for purple membrane were collected from individual specimens, each of which was viewed from only one angle. This ensured that the radiation dose on each patch of membrane did not accumulate and was as low as possible. The specimens were supported on carbon-coated grids in specimen holders which were bent to fixed tilt angles. Intensities were measured from electron diffraction patterns and phases calculated from micrograpi~ taken with very,low doses. Corrections to the phases for the contrast transfer function were derived from a second, higher dose, electron micrograph of the area (see earlier, p. 198). Each electron diffraction pattern or pair of images provided data on one central

[Page 36]

L.A. AMOS, R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN Contrast of ursnyl stsln

-16o

- 5'o

s'o

16o

Distance from centre of vesicle ~,~)

FIG. 22. Plots of maximum contrast from negative stain on each section of several 3-D maps; such

curves provide a rough idea of the amount of material at each level and hence the mean density variation. (a) Triton-cytochromeoxidasevesicles. Contrast

of

strain

.

/ /

/ \./'\.~.

.1._..~._.-j''/" _ -

tOO

~00

Distance from center of structure,

FIG. 22(b). Deoxycholate-cytochrome oxidase vesicles. coXrmt of stmn

-2b

-~b

~b

2b

t:~tmce fromcentre of strmtum (4) FIG. 22(c). Zn-tubulin sheets. section through 3-D Fourier space (Fig. 6); however, because of the p3 symmetry of the membrane, data on two rotationally related planes were also defined. The symmetry thus helped in falling Fourier space. Nevertheless, 15 diffraction patterns, providing 1,800 independent intensity measurements, and 18 pairs of mierographs, from which a correspondingly large number of phase values had to be calculated, were required to sample Fourier space adequately out to 7 A resoution (0.14 A - i ) .

[Page 37]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

TAaLE 4. PUSLISHEDSTgUCTURALANALYS~SOF 2-D CRYSTALS

Specimen Natural purple membrahe patches Detergent purple membrane Triton-cytochrome oxidase Deoxycholate cytochrome oxidase Ribosome tetramers

Contrast medium

2-sided Sheet plane thickness group (A)

Net resolution

glucose

p3

3-D to 7 A

glucose

p22,2,

2-D to 6.5 A

Henderson and Unwin, 1975 Unwin and Henderson, 1975 Michel et al. (1980)

glucose uranyl

p22t2t p22t2 t

2-D to 12 JL 3-D to 30 J~

Deatherage et al. (1982) Henderson et al. (1977) Frey et al. (1978) Fuller et al. (1979)

uranyl

p 121

3-D to 25 .~

uranyl

p4

3-D to 90 A 3-D to 50 A

uranyl- and gold-

References*

Frey (1978)

Unwin (1977) Unwin and TaddOi (1977) Kuhlbrandt and Unwin (1982)

glucose Zn-tubulin sheets

uranyl

p12~

2-D to 16 A 3-D to 20 A

Gap junctions

uranyl

p6

3-D to 18 A

Baker and Amos (1978) Amos and Baker (1979a,b) Crepeau et al. (1977, 1978) Mandelkow et al. (1979) Tamm et al. (1979) Zampighi and Unwin (1979) Unwin and Zampighi (1980)

* 3-D analyses and associated 2-D studies.

Most structures which have been studied subsequently have been stained, and simplified versions of these procedures, more appropriate to the lower resolution of the data, have been followed: both amplitudes and phases for each image have been derived from the same "minimal" dose electron micrograph (see Section III, p. 187 and Table la), on which the contrast has been sufficient for a direct measurement of the contrast transfer function. Micrographs which were too far under focus to include all recordable reflections within the first Thon ring of their diffraction patterns have normally been rejected. Often, in the case of negatively stained subjects, tilt series of micrographs of the same area of specimen have been collected. This helps to speed up the process of accurately orienting the transform planes in 3-D Fourier space and in correlating the phase origins in images at different tilt angles. The multiple exposures do not usually appear to have too deleterious an effect on the resolution attainable for stained specimens. Thus, the Triton- and deoxycholatecytochrome oxidase structures (Henderson et al., 1977; Fuller et al., 1979) and the tubulin sheets studied by Tamm et al. (1979) were all analysed entirely from tilt series obtained using a 60 ° goniometer stage. Pairs of tilted and untilted views provide a useful compromise in which each tilted image is of a minimally dosed specimen, while the untilted view allows the orientation to be easily determined. This approach was found to be particularly useful in the collection of data at high tilt angles for the cell wall of Sulfolobus. The idea of bending the specimen support (see p. 217) has been taken further, to the extent of cutting and bending the support grid itself, before placing it in a tilting goniometer. Tilt angles of greater than 60 ° (up to 80 °) can obtained in this way. Thus, Unwin obtained tilted views up to 76 ° for ribosome crystals (Unwin, 1977) and up to 79 ° for gap junctions (Unwin and Zampighi, 1980). Figures 14-20 show examples of the data which have been obtained. It is clear that the data from negatively stained specimens are noisier than those from unstained purple membrane. This is particularly true for the amplitude (or intensity) values, whhich fluctuate greatly between different samples along the lattice lines. For this reason, it is important to oversample the data for negatively stained specimens--notice the much greater density of sample points for the negative stain examples than was obtained for purple membrane. It is also dPS 39:3 - F

[Page 38]

L.A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWrN

worth bearing in mind that this uncertainty in the amplitudes will affect the relative volumes of different features in the final density map and that care should be taken when attempting to draw quantitative conclusions about the structures. Shapes and sizes of features in negative stain are much less certain than their positions. 2. Contrast Variation in the Computed Structures At the sort of resolutions we are concerned with for the most part, the ideal 3-D reconstructed image of a purely protein-containing structure would show only two density levels, that of the protein and that of the embedding medium, be it glucose or stain, etc. Ideally, therefore, the contrast (difference between the maximum and minimum densities) on each section through the 3-D image of a protein structure should be either a constant value, reflecting the difference between protein and the medium, or zero (continuous protein or continuous medium). If nucleic acid and/or lipid are present, there would ideally be three or even four different density levels. However, in all cases, the contrast would suddenly drop to zero at the outer surfaces of the sheet. In fact, in all cases studied so far, plots of contrast against section level through the map have shown a peak on the central plane of the sheet, usually falling off gradually towards the surfaces of the sheet (e.g. Fig. 22). Much of the reduction in contrast near the surfaces must be attributed to lack of resolution, of course, since it would require very high resolution to produce a sharp step at the sheet surfaces. Positive staining may also be partly responsible, since stain may tend to penetrate more strongly into the outermost surfaces of the protein molecules, reducing the contrast between protein and medium. Molecular surfaces in contact with other molecules may be protected to some extent from intensive positive staining. Some sort of artefact of the image reconstruction process, such as build-up of error in the origin refinement of progressively tilted views, couls also be partly responsible for an effect of this kind. However, in some cases there is an independent check on the phases of certain reflections and these have not been observed to diverge. For example, the data in Figs. 16 and 19 have p 121 symmetry, for which the (h, 0, z*) lattice lines should be continuously real when the phase origin is set at the centre of the sheet. Possibly this issue will become clearer as further structures of varying composition are analysed. 3. Interpretation of the 3-D Map A reconstructed 3-D map of a structure will contain more substructural information (e,g. resolution into a number of domains) as resolution is increased. A rough rule of thumb seems to be that at 20 A resolution (as for negatively stained specimens), a 25-50,000 MW subunit will appear as a single blob, possibly with a suggestion of shape. This is the case for the bacteriorhodopsin molecule (MW 25,000) in purple membrane at 20 A resolution. Larger proteins will usually show as more than one domain. Cytochrome oxidase (MW 150,000), for example, appears as 3 blobs at 25 A resolution. With increasing resolution (which may be possible for unstained specimens), smaller domains can be resolved; i.e. number of blobs at (1/res.). Thus, purple membrane at 7 A resolution appears as 7 (elongated) blobs. It may be useful at this point to mention a few general points about the interpretation of low resolution three-dimensional maps. For unstained structures, even a 7-A map of protein density may be difficult to interpret in terms of molecular boundaries; this has been the experience of X-ray protein crystallographers. The tracing of polypeptide chains is usually not possible at such a resolution. The fact that a clear interpretation of the structure of bacteriorhodopsin could be made from the map of purple membrane is the result of a particularly favourable arrangement of the polypeptide. On the other hand, experience with negatively stained specimens during the last 10 yr suggests that the interpretation of molecular boundaries is often possible with only 20 A resolution. Regions of high stain exclusion revealed in the 3-D maps of soluble proteins (or any part of an integral membrane protein which protrudes out of the lipid bilayer) can usually be fairly reliably associated with the centres of smallish protein molecules or domains of larger molecules. This is because stain is excluded more by hydrophobicity than by protein density per se. Most soluble globular proteins (or the protruding parts of membrane proteins) tend to have a hydrophobic centre,

[Page 39]

3-D structuredeterminationby ©lcctronmicroscopyof 2-D crystals

while large areas of their surfaces are fairly hydrophilic. Some (small) degree of positive staining always occurs in the hydrophilic regions, which will include parts of molecules interacting ionically, rather than hydrophobicaUy, with neighbouring molecules. Thus, although the protein density between individual molecules may be as high as at tl~ centre of a molecule, the degree of stain exclusion is usually lower and individual molecules may thereby be distinguished readily. That this is so has been proved for the case of TMV protein disks, where the subunits are seen clearly separated in 3-D maps of negatively stained protein recontructed from electron micrographs (Finch and Klug, 1971; Unwin and Klug, 1974), in good agreement with the high resolution X-ray maps (Champness et al., 1976; Bloomer et al., 1978). Moreover, the validity of image reconstruction of negatively stained specimens has been show in detail in this case; the small difference in tilt between subunits in the two layers of the disk and the slewing of the subunits revealed by image reconstruction (Finch and Klug, 1971; Crowther and Amos, 1971) has also been confirmed by the X-ray solution of the structure (Bloomer et al., 1978). Interpretation of integral membrane protein boundaries can of course be much more complicated, as illustrated by the case of cytochrome oxidase (Deatherage et al., 1982). 4. Experience with Different Neoative Stains and Embeddin 0 Media Heavy metal compounds, such as uranyl acetate (unbuffered) or phosphotungstic acid (neutralized with NaOH or KOH), provide a very strong contrast with proteins (e.g. Fig. 7) and other biological molecules, which all appear as equal stain~exduding regions. On the other hand, glucose or sucrose used as embedding media for the preservation of unstained specimens (Unwin and Henderson, 1975), are very similar to biological molecules in terms of electron scattering cross-sections and give rise to very low contrast images (see, e.g. Figs. 8a, b). For particles such as ribosomes, it is desirable to distinguish between protein and nucleic acid, and suitable stains have been sought to match out the density of one or the other. Experiments with mixtures of glucose a n d uranyl acetate and with gold thio-glucose (Kuhlbrandt and Unwin, 1982) have given some promising results in this direction. These stains also appear to give slightly better support as embedding media than the heavy metal salts alone. Taylor and Amos (1981) also found that helical particles stained with a mixture of uranyl-acetate and glucose appeared to give images with better helical order.

X. SOME RESULTS 1. Purple Membrane X-ray diffraction had already shown that ~t-helices formed a major part of the structure of bacteriorhodopsin, and that they were all oriented roughly perpendicular to the plane of the membrane (Henderson, 1975; Blaurock, 1975). The model obtained by image reconstruction from electron micrographs and diffraction patterns added significantly to this information. The number of ~-helical rods was shown to be seven and their relative lengths and densities were revealed, also the precise arrangement of the helices relative to each other. The molecular boundary was deduced from the original map and has since been confirmed by comparison with the projected image of a different crystal form of bacteriorhodopsin in detergent (Michel et al., 1980). 2. Cytochrome Oxidase The protein of cytochrome oxidase is about 150,000 MW and contains seven polypeptide chains. However, at negative stain resolution, this is still a small structure, in which it is difficult to resolve internal domains. Nevertheless, the map obtained from two-dimensional crystals of the purified protein has been interpreted (Fuller et al., 1979) in terms of three domains, the largest thought to protrude into the space on one side of the membrane (cytoplasmic side) and the other two being embedded in the membrane (Capaldi et al., 1982). The overall shape was described as a lop-sided Y. Although the biological significance of these observations on shape and domain structure are not dear, without image processing of these crystalline arrays, much less concrete statements about the structure would have been

[Page 40]

L.A. AMOS,R, HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNW1N

possible. Current efforts are underway to obtain an accurate structure for the enzyme in the crystal form with a lipid membrane, and to locate the cytochrome c binding site (Deatherage et al., 1982). Another mitochondrial membrane protein, cytochrome c reductase has r.ecently been crystallized in the form of two-dimensional arrays (Wingfield et al., 1979) and its threedimensional structure has been studied by the methods described here (Leonard et al., 1981). 3. R i b o s o m e s

The three-dimensional map of ribosome tretramers obtained from crystals which were originally formed in contact with membrane, shows each ribosome as two morphological units, which are almost certainly the large and small subunits (Unwin, 1977). The arrangement in the map suggests that the two subunits lie side-by-side on the membrane, not in the cottage loaf arrangement which is popularly depicted, with the small subunit balanced on top of the large one. This difference may be important as the arrangement and functions of the various components of the subunits become known in more detail and models of the translation mechanism are devised. The "hole" which is often observed in electron microscope images of individual ribosomes probably represents the boundary between the large and small subunits. 4. Tubulin

In this case, the region of stain exclusion had a very similar shape for the tubulin dimers (MW 110,000) as had been found by reconstructing images of intact microtubules with helical symmetry. Extra details of the shape of the grooves on the inside surface of the molecule (as they would be in microtubules) suggested a new interpretation of X-ray diffraction patterns of oriented microtubules which is compatible with the negative stain. images. The X-ray patterns had previously been interpreted to mean that the molecule had grossly different shapes in water and in stain.

CYTOCHROME OXIDASE- P2~2,2

FIG. 23. Structural interpretations of several of the structures mentioned in the text. (a)

Triton-eytoehromeoxidasevesicles:the packingand distributionof stainshowsa moleculewhich sticks out of the bilayerlargelyon one side, the insideof the vesicle(Hendersonet al., 1977).

CYTOCHROME OXIDASE- P21 Fie. 23(b).Deoxycholate-eytochomeoxidasecrystals:the packingfoundin a sheet-likecrystalshows the monomericstructure (Fulleret al., 1979).

[Page 41]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

FI6. 23(c). Ribosomes attached to a membrane. From unprocessed electron microscope images, the ribosome was originally envisaged as a cottage-loaf like structure, with the small subunit sitting on top of the large subunit. The improved resolution in the 3-D map of Unwin (1977) shows it is much more likely that the two subunits lie side by side on the membrane.

@ FIG. 23(d). Relationship between tubulin protofilaments (shown as end-on views) as found in Zntubulin sheets, where they alternate in orientation, and in normal microtubules.

FIG. 23(e). The two states found in gap junction crystals, under different conditions (Unwin and Zampighi, 1980).

5. Gap Junctions T w o forms of crystal which were obtained were shown to be apparently m a d e up of the same sort of protein subunits, except for a subtle difference in conformation. This difference can be described in terms of a small twist in the rings of six subunits that make up the morphological unit. The effect of the,twist appears to open or close the o p e n i n g i n the centre of the ring and the two crystal forms m a y therefore represent the physiologically opened and closed states o f the junctions.

[Page 42]

L.A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWrN

6. Cell Wall of Sulfolobus Acidocaldarius

The proteinaceous outer cell wall of this sulfur bacterium was chosen as the specimen for the 1980 EMBO Course because of its good crystalline order and resistance to radiation damage (Michel et al., 1981). As seen in projection in election micrographs (see Fig. 7a) the wall has a hexagonal lattice with a unit cell dimension of about 200 A. It is clear from computer filtered irr~ges (e.g. Fig. 24a) that the symmetry is p6, with the 140,000-170,000 MW protein subunits arranged as dimers around the 6-fold symmetry axes. Several tilt series, including views at tilt angles of up to 60 ° (see, e.g. Fig. 7), were collected for the course and processed to gives the curves shown in Fig. 20. The model illustrated in Figs. 24b, c was constructed from this limited set of data. The difference between the two surfaces, the outside (Fig. 24b) showing a surface which is etched only with very fine detail and the inner surface (Fig. 24c) showing a series of deep pockets and large protrusions, agrees well with the two appearances obtained by Michel et al. for shadowed specimens. However, it is clear from Fig. 20 that many of the (h, k) lines of intensity are still strong at the end of the range of data collected so far. It will be interesting, therefore, to see what the effect will be, on the map, of the inclusion of data from views of the structure at higher tilt angles (Taylor, K. A. and Deatherage, J. F., in preparation) and from side views such as that in Fig. 21. 7. Thin 3-D Crystals

Crystalline sheets consisting of more than one unit cell thickness can be treated similarly, provided they are sufficiently thin to provide enough contrast and to avoid multiple scattering (see earlier). The difference is that the (h, k) lines of intensity are broken up into spots or streaks. Ohlendorf et al. (1978) have analysed a thin three-dimensional biological crystal by electron microscopy, using similar methods. The main difference is that intensities appear on the (h, k) lattice lines only over restricted regions corresponding to the third lattice

FIG. 24(a). 2-D projected image of PTA-stained Sulfolobus cell wall, computer filtered assuming p6 symmetry. The heavily contoured regions represent high stain exclusion.

[Page 43]

3-D structure determinationby electron microscopyof 2-D crystals

dimension, so the tilt angles had to be chosen very carefully. Catalase crystals (see Unwin and Henderson, 1975) also consist of several layers, but the structure has not yet been studied in three dimensions because of technical problems. XI. R E S U L T S ON O T H E R S T R U C T U R E S OF S P E C I A L I N T E R E S T IN THE F O R M OF 2-D ARRAYS Two-dimensional crystals are a fairly common feature in ultrastructural biology: there are numerous bacterial and algal cell walls, viral walls and coats consisting of periodic arrays of macromolecules. Eukaryotic cell membranes are not usually naturally highly ordered, but the purified membrane proteins frequently form two-dimensional crystals in vitro. The following examples represent only a small fraction of the known structures of biological interest which might be studied by the above methods. They have been chosen in most cases to illustrate different methods of specimen preparation and structure analysis that have already been used.

Fro. 24 Co)and (¢).Two difm-mtviewsof a bahm-wocdmodelrq:cmmuin8a 3-D map of s section of cellwall,calculatedfromthe data shownin Fig.20. (b) is believedto showthe externalsurfaceof the wall, (¢) the inside.

[Page 44]

L.A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWXN

1. Acetylcholine Receptors These interesting 2-D crystals have been studied in projection by a number of different groups (Ross et al., 1977; Klymkowsky and Stroud, 1979; Cartaud et al., 1978; Kistler and Stroud, 1981), but so far information has unfortunately been limited by disorder and the low symmetry (pl) present. 2. A TPase (Coupling Factor F1) The enzyme complex from a bacterial cell membrane, which is closely related to the ATPase that forths part of the "lollipops" on mitochondrial membranes, has been purified and reconstituted to form regular 2-dimensional arrays. Wakabayashi et al. (1977) have studied the projected structure by digital image analysis and have shown that the complex has pseudo-sixfold symmetry. It is thus thought to consist of three alpha-subunits and three beta-subunits plus some minor components. 3. Antibody Labelling Aberrant tubular forms of the T-even phage heads, known as polyheads, have been studied by 2-dimensional image analysis in some detail by both the Cambridge and Basel groups and also by Yanagida in Kyoto (DeRosier and Klug, 1972; Yanagida et al., 1972). An interesting development in these studies is the use of Fab fragments of specific antibodies to certain protein components of the tubes, by Aebi et al. (1977), combined with 2-D image analysis, to reveal clearly the extra density contributed by the Fab fragments. For certain components, the antibody fragment will bind only to one side of the 2-dimensional array, thus providing some limited information about its position in the 3rd dimension, as well as localizing it in the 2-dimensional unit cell. 4. Correction of Distorted Lattices and Analysis of Disordered Crystals Natural 2-dimensional arrays and even some artificially induced 2-D crystals may suffer from various kinds of crystal defect, such as vacancies, twins or dislocations. Other specimens, although presumably perfect in.solution, are very prone to stretching, shrinkage and similar distortions when prepared for electron microscopy. It is possible that such problems can be overcome by image processing techniques which compensate for the defects. A successful application of this type of cosmetics is the work of Crowther and Sleytr (1977) on a slightly curved bacterial cell wall, whose lattice was "unbent" before being Fourier transform filtered. It is possible that future applications of "unbending" techniques may give improved resolution. For more disordered crystals it is likely that a correlation averaging method, such as that most recently described by Saxton and Baumeister (1982), will provide the best solutions. According to this procedure, the positions of individual molecular images are determined accurately through correlation with a reference image which is moved around the whole field of view: once located, the individual images are averaged simply by direct superposition. This method of averaging avoids the loss of resolution encountered with the conventional Fourier transform filtering method when the specimen is not perfectly crystalline; it also recognizes and excludes highly atypical molecules. The prcedure could readily be adapted to analyse structure in three dimensions, using a series of images of the same molecules at different tilt angles. 5. Limited 3-D Information from Shadowed Specimens Stained or unstained specimens give rise to images which are essentially projections of the structure in the direction of the electron beam. An image of a specimen which has been shadowed with a heavy metal, on the other hand, provides information about only one surface of the structure and possibly therefore some limited information about the threedimensional shape. This is especially true if one can combine information from projected views of negatively stained specimens with surface images of both sides from shadowed specimens (Kistler et at., 1978; Baumeister and Kubler, 1978). A method of obtaining quantitative information about the surface topography by digital analysis of the intensity

[Page 45]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

v a r i a t i o n in m i c r o g r a p h s of s h a d o w e d specimens has been w o r k e d o u t b y S m i t h a n d Kistler (1977). ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS W e are grateful to E M B O for s u p p o r t of the practical course on which this review is based, a n d also to the o t h e r p a r t i c i p a n t s in the course, b o t h teachers a n d students, for their c o n t r i b u t i o n s to the ideas c o n t a i n e d here. Dr. H. M i c h e l s u p p l i e d samples o f the S. acidocaldarius cell wall, which was the specimen we studied a n d which m a k e s u p several of the d i a g r a m s in the review. W e t h a n k also Dr. K. A. T a y l o r for t a k i n g s o m e o f the electron m i c r o g r a p h s , Mrs. J. R a b b i t t s for extremely patient secretarial help a n d Mr. C. Villa for technical assistance. Lastly, we t h a n k Dr. R. A. C r o w t h e r for his incisive r e a d i n g of the p e n u l t i m a t e draft.

REFERENCES AEBI,U., SMITH,P. R., DUBOCHET,J., HENRY,C. and KELLENBERGER,E. (1973) A study of the structure of the Tlayer of Bacillus brevis, d. Supramol. Struct. 1, 498-522. AEBI, U., TEN HEGGELER,B,, ONORATO,L., KISTLER,J. and SHOWE,M. K. (1977) New method for localising proteins in periodic structures: Fab fragment labelling combined with image processing of Electron Micrographs. PNAS 74, 5514-5518. AGS,A. W., FRANK,F. C. and KELLER,A. (1958) Crystallinityeffectsin the electron microscopy of polyethylene. Phil. Mag. 3, 32-55. AMOS, L. A. and BAKER, T. S. (1979a) Three-dimensional structure of tubulin protofilaments. Nature 279, 607-612. AMOS, L. A. and BAKER, T. S. (1979b) Three-dimensional image of tubulin in zinc-induced sheets,reconstructed from electron microg/'aphs. Int. J. Biol. Macromolec. I, 146-156. AMOS, L. A. and KLUG, A. (1972) Image filteringby computer. Prec. 5th Europ. Congress on EM (Manchester). Vol. l, pp. 580-581. BAHR,G. F,, JOHNSON,F. B. and ZEITLER,E. (1965) The elementary composition of organic objects after electron irradiation. Lab. Invest. 14, 377-395. Also published as a book Quantitative Electron Microscopy edited by BAHR,G. F. and ZEITLER,E. H. Published by Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A. BAKER,T. S. and AMOS,L. A. (1968) Structure of the tubulin dimer in zinc-induced sheets. J. MoL Biol. 123, 80-106. BAUMEISTER,W. and KUBLER,O. (1978) Topographic study of the cell surface of Micrococcus radiodurans. PNAS 75, 5525-5528. BAUMEISTER,W. and VOGEL,W. (1980) Eds. Electron Microscopy at Molecular Dimension. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. BLAUROCK,A. E. (1975) Becteriorhodopsin: A trans-membrane pump containing a-helix, d. Mol. Biol. 93, 139-158. BLOOMER,A. C., CHAMPNESS,J. N., BRICOGNE,G., STADEN,R. and KLUG,A. (1978) Protein disk of tobacco mosaic virus at 2.8 A resolution showing the interactions within and between subunits. Nature 276, 362-368. BRAGG,W. C. (1939) The Crystalline State. Bell, London. BRENNER, S. and HORNE, R. W. (1959) A negative staining method for high resolution electron microscopy of viruses. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 34, 103-110. BURGE, R. E. and SMITH,G. H. (1962) A new calculation of electron scattering cross sections and a theoretical discussion of image contrast in the electron microscope. Prec. Phys. Soc. 79, 673-690. CAPALDI,R. A., DEATHERAGE,J. D., FULLER,S. D. and HENDERSON,R. (1982) Comparison of two crystal forms of cytochrome oxidase. (In preparation.) CARTAUD,J., BENEDETTI,E. L., SOBEL,A. and CHANGEUX,J.-P. (1978) A morphological study of the cholinergic receptor protein from Torpedo marmorata in its membrane environment and in its detergent-extracted purified form. J. Cell Sci. 29, 313-337. CHAMPNESS,J. N., BLOOMER,A. C., BRICOGNE,G., BUTLER,P. J. G. and KLUG,A. (1976) The structure of the protein disk of tobacco mosaic virus to 5 A resolution. Nature 259, 20-24. CREPRAU,R. H., McEWEN, B., DYKES,G. and EDELSTEIN,S. J. (1977) Structural studies on porcine brain tubulin in extended sheets. J. Mol. Biol. 116, 301-315. CREPEAU,R. H., MCEWEN,B. and EOELSTEIN,S. J. (1978) Differencesin alpha and beta polypeptidechains of tubulin resolved by electron microscopy with image reconstruction. PNAS 75, 5006-5010. CREWE, A. V., WALL,J. and LANGMORE,J. (1970) Visibility of single atoms. Science 168, 1338-1340. CROWTHER,R. A. (1971) Procedures for three-dimensional reconstruction of spherical viruses by Fourier synthesis from electron micrographs. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. (Lend.) B261, 221-230. CROWTHER, R. A. and AMOS, L. A. (1971) Harmonic analysis of electron microscope images with rotational symmetry. J. Mol. Biol. 60, 123-130. CROWTHER,R. A. and KLUG,A. (1975) Structural analysis of macromolecular assemblies by image reconstruction from electron micrographs. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 44, 161-182. CROWTHER,R. A. and SLEYIR,U. (1977) An analysis of the fine structure of the surface layers from two strains of CIostridia, including correction for distorted images, d. Ultra. Res. 58, 41-49. CROWTHER,R. A., DEROSIER,D. J. and KLUG,A. (1970) The reconstruction of a three-dimensional structure from projections and its application to electron microscopy. Prec. Roy. Soc. A. 317, 319-340. CROWTHER, R. A., AMOS, L. A., FINCH, J. T., DEROSIER, D. J. and KLUG, A. (1970) Three dimensional reconstructions of spherical viruses by Fourier synthesis from electron micrographs. Nature 226, 421-425. DAINTY,J. C. and SHAW,R. (1974) Image Science. Academic Press, London, New York and San Francisco.

[Page 46]

L.A. AMOS, R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN

DF~THERAGE,J. F., HENDERSON,R. and CAPALDI,R. A. (1982a) The structure of cytochrome oxidase vesicle crystals in negative stain. J. Mol. Biol. in press. D~THERAGE, J. F., HENDERSON, R. and CAPALDt, R. A. (198213) The relationship between membrane and cytoplasmic domains in cytochrome c oxidase by electron microscopy in media of different density. J. Mol. Biol. in press. DEROSIER, D. J. and KLUG,A. (1968) Reconstruction of three-dimensional structures from electron micrographs. Nature 217, 130-134. DEROSlER,D. J. and KLUG,A. (1972) Structure of the tubular variants of the head of bacteriophage T4 (polyheads) (Appendix: Indexing and filtering of the diffraction patterns). J. Mol. Biol. 65, 469-483. DEROSiER,D. J. and MOORE,P. B. (1970) Reconstruction of three-dimensionalimages from electron micrographs of structures with helical symmetry. J. Mol. Biol. 52, 355-369. DERoSIER, D. J., MANDELKOW,E., SILLIMAN,A., TILNEY, L. and KANE, R. (1977) Structure of actin containing filaments from two types of non-muscle cells. J. Mot. Biol. 113, 673-695. DYKES,G., CREPEAU,R. H. and EDELSTEIN,S. J. (1978) Three-dimensional reconstruction of the fibres of sickle cell haemoglobin. Nature 272, 506-510. EARNSHAW,W. C., GOLDBERG,E. B. and CROWTHER,R. A. (1979) The distal half of the tail fibre of bacteriophage T4. J. Mol. Biol. 312, 101-131. ERICKSON,H. P. and KLUG, A. (1971) Measurement and compensation of defocusing and aberrations by Fourier processing of electron micrographs. Phil. Trans. Roy Soc. Ser. B261, 105-118. ERICKSON, H. P., VOTER, W. A. and LEONARD, K. (1978) Image reconstruction in electron microscopy. Enhancement of periodic structure by optical filtering. Methods in Enzym. 49, 36-63. FABERGI~,C. and OLIVER, R. M. (1974) Methylamine tungstate, a new negative stain. J. Microsc. 20, 241-246. FARNELL,G. C. and FLINT,R. B. (1975) Photographic aspects of electron microscopy. In: Principles and Techniques in Electron Microscot)v. (ed. M. A. HAYAT),5, pp. 19-61. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York. FINCH,J. T. and KLUG,A. (1971) Three-dimensionalreconstruction of the stacked disk aggregate of tobacco mosaic virus protein from electron micrographs. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. B261, 211-219. FINCH, J. T., KLUG, A. and NERMUT,M. V. (1967) The structure of the rnacromolecular units on the cell walls of Bacillus potymyxa. J. Cell. Sci. 2, 587-590. FREY,T. (1978) The structures of glutamine synthetase and cytochrome c oxidase---studies by electron microscopy and image analysis. Proc. 9th International Conoress Elec. Microscopy (Toronto) 3, 107-119. FREY, T., CHAN, S. H. P. and SCHATZ,G. (1978) Structure and orientation of cytochrome c oxidase in crystalline membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 235, 4389-4395. FULLER,S. D., CAPALDI,P. and HENDERSON,R. (1979) Structure of cytochrome c oxidase in deoxycholate-derived two-dimensional crystals. J. Mol. Biol. 134, 305-327. GETTNER,M. E. and ORNSTEIN,L. (1955) In: Physical Techniques in Biolooical Research (eds. G. OSTERand A. W. POLLISTER).Vol. 3, p. 627. Academic Press. GLAESER, R. M. (1975) Radiation damage and biological electron microscopy. In: Physical Aspects of Electron Microscopy and Microbeam Analysis (eds. B. SI~GE and D. R. BEAMAN),pp. 205-212. Wiley. GORDON,C. N. (1972) The use of octadecanol monolayers as wetting agents in the negative staining technique. J. Ultrastruct. Res. 39, 173-185. GRIMSTONE,A. V. (1968) The Electron Microscope in Biology. Arnold, London. HALL, C. E. (1955) Electron densitometry of stained virus particles. J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol. 1, 1-12. HALL, C. E. (1966) Introduction to Electron Microscopy. 2rid ed. McGraw-Hill, New York. HAWKES,P. W. (1972) Electron Optics and Electron Microscopy. Taylor and Francis, London. HEIDF-~REICH,R. D. (1964) Fundamentals of Transmission Electron Microscopy. Interscience Publishers, Wiley, New York. HENDERSON,R. (1975) The structure of the purple membrane from Halobacterium halobium; analysis of the X-ray diffraction pattern. J. Mot. Biol. 93, 123-138. HENDERSON, R. and UNWIN,P. N. T. (1975) Three-dimensional model of purple membrane obtained by electron microscopy. Nature 257, 28-32. HENDERSON,R., CAPALDI,R. A. and LEIOH, J. S. (1977) Arrangement of cytochrome oxidase molecules in twodimensional vesicle crystals. J. Molo Biol. 112, 631-648. HOLSER,W, T. (1958) Point groups and plane groups in a two-sided plane and their sub-groups. Z. kristalloor. 110, 266-281. HOPPE, W. (1971) Use of zone correction plates and other techniques for structure determination of aperiodic objects at atomic resolution using a conventional electron microscope. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. B261, 71-94. HUXLEY,H. E. (1957) Some observations on the structure of tobacco mosaic virus. Proc. Stockholm Conf. on EM, 1956, pp. 260-261. Almquist and Wiksell, Stockholm. HUXLEY,H. E. and KLUG,A. (1971) (Eds.) New developments in electron microscopy. Royal Society, London. Also in: Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. B261, 1-230. HUXLEY,H. E. and ZUBAY,G. (1960) Electron microscope observations on the structure of microsomal particles from Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Biol. 2, 10-18. KAY, D. (1965). Techniques for Electron Microscopy. (ed. D. KAY), 2rid ed. Davis, Philadelphia. IQSTLER,J. and STROUD,R. M. (1981) Crystalline arrays of membrane-bound acetylcholine receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 78, 3678-3682. KISTLER,J., AEBI,U., ONORATO,L., TEN HEOGELER,B. and SHOWE,M. K. (1978) Structural changes during the transformation of bacteriophage I"4 polyheads: Characterization of the initial and final states by freeze-drying and shadowing Fab-fragment-labelled preparations. J. Mol. Biol. 126, 571-589. KLUG, A. and BIZRGER,J. E. (1964) An optical method for the analysis of periodicities in electron micrographs and some observations on the mechanism of negative staining. J. Mot. Biol. I0, 565-569. KLUG,A. and I~ROSIER, D. J. (1966) Optical filtering of electron micrographs: reconstruction of one sided images. Nature 212, 29-32.

[Page 47]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

KLYMKOWSKY,M. W. and STROUD,S. M. (1979) Immunospecific identification and three-dimensional structure of a membrane-bound acetylcholine receptor from Torpedo californica. J. Mol. Biol. 128, 319-334. KUItLaaANDT, W. and UNWnq, P. N. T. (1982) The distribution of RNA and protein in crystalline eukaryotic ribosomes. J. Mol. Biol., in press. LeON,~U3,K., WINOFteLD,P., Al~,D,T. and W~Iss, H. (1981) Three-dimensional structure ofubiquinol :cytochrome c reductase from Neurospora mitochondria determined by electron microscopy of membrane crystals. J. Mol. Biol. 149, 259-274. LIpSON,H. (1972). Optical Transforms (ed. H. Ln,soN). Academic Press, London and New York. LIPSON,H. and TAYI.OR,C.A. (1958)(eds.) Fourier Transforms and X-ray Diffraction. Bell, London. MANDELKOW,E. M., MANDELKOW,E. and SCHULTtlEISS,R. (1979) Correlation between structural polarity and polar assembly of brain tubulin. J. Mol. Biol. 135, 293-299. MARKHAM,R., FREY,S. and HJLLS,G. J. (1963) Methods for the enhancement of image detail and accentuation of structure in electron microscopy. Virology 20, 88-102. MARKHAM,R., HITCHBORN,J. H., HXLLS,G. J. and FlaY, S. (1964) The anatomy of the tobacco mosaic virus. Virology 22, 342-359. MeLLEMA,J. E. (1980) Computer reconstruction of regular biological objects. Topics in Current Physics 13, 89-126. MICHEL, H., OESTeRHELT,D. and HENDERSON,R. (1980) Orthorhombic two-dimensional crystal form of purple membrane. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 77, 338-342. MICHEL, H., NEUOeBAUeR, D.-Ch. and OESTeRHELT, D. (1980). The 2-D crystalline cell wall of Sulfolobus acidocaldorius: structure, sohibilizationand reassembly. In: Electron Microscopy at Molecular Dimensions (eds. W. BAUMEISTeRand W. VOGELL).Springer-Verlag, Berlin. MISeLL, D. L. (1973) Image formation in the electron microscope with particular reference to the defects in electron-optical images. Adv. in Electronics and Electron Physics 32, 63-191. M1SeLt~ D. C. (1978) Image analysis, enhancement and interpretation. In: Practical Methods in Electron Microscopy (ed. A.-M. Gt,~UERT), VoL 7, pp. 1-305. North-Holland Publishing Co. OtlLENDORF, D. H., WRENN, R. F. and BANASZAK, L. J. (1978) Three-dimensional structure of the Lipovitellin-phosvitincomplex from amphibian oocytes. Nature 272, 29-32. PeA~e, D. C. and BAKER,R. F. (1948) Sectioning techniques for electron microscopy using a conventional microtome. Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 67, 470-474. ROBERTS,K., SHAw,P. J. and HILLS,G. J. (1981) High resolution electron microscopy ofglycoproteinsthe crystalline cell wall of Lobomonas. J. Cell Science 51, 295-321. ROSS,M. J., KLYMKOWSKY,M. W., AGARD,D. A. and STROUD,R. M. (1977) Structural studies of a membrane-bound acetylcholine receptor from Torpedo californica. J. Mol. Biol. 116, 635-659. SAXTON, W. O. and BAUMEIS~&W. (1982) A novel image averaging method helps clarify the structure of a bacterial cell envelope protein. Ultramicrosc. in press. SHAW,P. L and HILLS,G. J. (1981) Tilted specimen in the electron microscope: A simple specimen holder and the calculation of tilt aogles for crystalline specimens. Micron 12, 279-282. SMITH, P. R. (1978) An integrated set of computer programs for processing electron micrographs of biological structures. Ultramicrosc. 3, 153-160. SMITH,P. R. and KISTLeR,J. (1977) Surface reliefscomputed from micrographs of heavy metal-shadowed specimens. J. Ultra. res. 61, 124-133. TAMM, L. K., CREP~,U, R. H. and EDELSTEr~,S. J. (1979) Three dimensional reconstruction of tubulin in zincinduced sheets. J. Mol. Biol. 130, 473-492. TAYLOR,K. A. and AMOS,L. A. (1981) A new model for the geometry of the binding of myosin crossbridges to muscle thin filaments. J. Mol. Biol. 147, 297-324. THON, F. (1966) Zur Defokussierungsabh/ingigkeit des Phasenkontrastes bei der elektronenmikroskopischen Abbildung. Z. Naturf. 21a, 476-478. UNWIN,P. N. T. (1972) Electron microscopy of biological specimens by means of an electrostaticphase plate. Proc. Roy. Soc. London A329, 327-359. UNWlN,P. N. T. (1974) Electron microscopy of the stacked disk aggregate of tobacco mosaic virus protein. II. The influence of electron irradiation on the stain distribution. J. Mol. Biol. 87, 657-670. UNWlN, P. N. T. (1975) Beef liver catalase structure: interpretation of electron micrographs. J. Mol. Biol. 98, 235-242. UNWlN,P. N. T. (1977) Three-dimensional model of membrane-bound ribosomes obtained by electron microscopy. Nature 269, 118-122. UNWlN,P. N. T. and HeNDeRSON,R. (1975) Molecular structure determination by electron microscopy of unstained crystalline specimens. J. Mol. Biol. 94, 425-440. UNW~, P. N. T. and KLUO,A. (1974) Electron microscopy of the stacked disk aggregate of tobacco mosaic virus protein. I. Three-dimensional image reconstruction. J. Mol. Biol. 87, 641--656. UNWn~,P. N. T. and TADDel,C. (1977) Packing of ribosomes in crystals from the lizard Lacerta sicula. J. Mol. Biol. 114, 491-506. UNWIN,P. N. T. and ZAMPIGHI,G. (1980) Structure of the junction between communicating cells. Nature 283, 345-549. VALENTINE,R. C. (1961) Contrast enhancement in the electron microscopy of viruses. Adv. Virus Res. g, 287-318. VALENTINE,R. C. (1966) The response of photographic emulsions to electrons. In: Advances in Optical and Electron Microscopy (ed& It. BAtERand V. E. COSSL~TT),Vol. 1, pp. 180-202. A~demic Press, London and New York. WArO~AYAStlI,T., HUXLEY,H. E., AMOS,L. A. and KLUC3,A. (1975) Three-dimensional image reconstruction of actin-tropomyosincomplex and actin-tropomyosin-tropuninT-troponin I complex. J. Mol. Biol. 93, 477-497. WAKA~YASHI,T., KUaOTA,M., YOSmDA,M. and KAGAWA,Y. (1977) Structure of ATPase (coupling factor TF1) from a thermophilic bacterium. J. Mol. Biol. 117, 515-519. WILLIAMS,R. C. (1977) Use of polylysine for adsorption of nucleic acids and enzymes to electron microscope specimen filmR. Proc. Nat. Acad. $ci. U.S.A. 74, 2311-2315.

[Page 48]

L.A. AMOS,R. HENDERSONand P. N. T. UNWIN

WILLIAMS,R. C. and FISHER,H. W. (1970) Electron microscopy of tobacco mosaic virus under conditions of minimal beam exposure. J. Mol. Biol. $2, 121-123. WILLIAMS,R. C. and WYCKOFF,R. W. G. (1945) Electron shadow micrograph of the tobacco mosaic virus protein. Science 101, 594-596. WINGFIELD,P., ARAD,T., LEONARD,K. and WEISS, H. (1979) Membrane crystals of ubiquinone: cytochrome c rcductasc from Neurospora mitochondria. Nature 280, 696-697. YANAOtDA,H., DEROSmR,D. J. and KLUG,A. (1972) Structure of the tubullar variants of the head of bacteriophage T4 (polyhcads). II. Structural transition from a hexamer to a 6 + 1 morphological unit. J. Mol. Biol. 65, 489-499. ZAMPIOHI, G. and UNWIN, P. N. T. (1979) Two forms of isolated gap junctions. J. Mol. Biol. 135, 451-464. A P P E N D I X I. E S T I M A T I O N O F T I L T A N G L E S A N D T I L T AXES The position of the tilt axis relative to the crystallographic axes, and of the magnitude of the tilt angle can he found in a variety of ways. Two are given here, which both use the image or its transform directly. Of course, the tilt angle, especially in a tilt series, will have been accurately recorded from the goniometer stage of the electron microscope at the time of recording of the image. This information is a useful check on the results from the procedures detailed here. A good procedure is to combine the goniometer readings in a tilt series (to determine the difference of tilt angle between adjacent views of the same object) with the internal calculation to find the absolute tilt angle. This is because a reading of 0° on the goniometer may not mean the crystal is untilted. The copper grid (by being bent), the carbon support film or the crystal itself may be tilted (sometimes up to 15°) to the nominally flat plane. 1. Method (a) From the Distortion of the Lattice If the crystal is tilted to an angle 0 from the untilted direction (see Fig. 6), the lattice will appear in the tilted projected view to have shrunk by a factor of (cos 0) in the direction perpendicular to the tilt axis. In reciprocal space, the spot spacings will be stretched by a factor of (1/cos 0). It is possible, using various geometrical formulae, to determine both the tilt angle and tilt axis directly from the magnitude and direction of this stretching (Shaw and Hills, 1981 give the best method). Either a tilted and untilted view are compared, or, the distortion from, for example, a perfectlyhexagonal lattice,are used. For thismethod, best resultsare obtained at very large tiltangles (> 30 °) since (I/cos 0) is very near to 1.0 and does not vary much for smaller angles.At angles of 50 ° or greater,however, very accurate determinations of tiltangle and tiltaxis are possible.It is thereforethe method of choice for high tilts.The highest tiltmember of a tiltseriesis often treatedby thismethod, and the lesstiltedmembers then have the same tiltaxis,but have tiltangles determined by the differenceof the goniometer stage reading at the time of microscopy. 2. Method (b) Change of Focus Across the Carbon Film Here, the CTF at the four corners of the film are used to measure the level of focus at different positions of the image. The CTF is measured by optical diffraction of the (high dose) image, and the level of focus in each corner estimated from standard curves such as those of Fig. 4. The change in level of focus is the same as the change in height of different parts of the specimen. The separation of these image points at the specimen can be calculated knowing the magnification (which must be separately determined, perhaps from the cell dimensions, if known accurately). The tilt angle and tilt axis can then be calculated. In practice this method works best for small tilt angles since small errors in measuring the position at which the CTF has been determined translate directly into errors in tan(0), and thereby to the tilt angle, 0. Some convention in the definition of the tilt axis must be used. We have found it convenient to define an angle TLTAXA which is the angle between the tilt axis and the a*-axis of the crystal. It is measured FROM the tilt axis to the a*-axis in the direction defined by a* to b* being positive. Thus if a* and b* have the normal relation (b* anticlockwise from a*), then TLTAXA positive means the tilt axis is clockwise from a*. The angle between the tilt axis and the b*-axis is the TLTAXA +ABANG where ABANG is the angle (3'*) between a* and b ~.

A P P E N D I X II. D E N S I T O M E T R Y Fourier transformation in the computer requires digitization of the image into numbers proportional to the optieafl density (absolute values for optical density are not normally required), which in turn should be proportional to the number of electrons in the image. It is best that the emulsion exposed to the electron image is used, since copies of the original negative made by photographic means will he distorted by non-linearities in the response of the photographic emulsion to light. In extreme cases, this can result in the production of spurious detail (often at much higher resolutions than the specimen contained) in the copied image. However, the original image developed with a speed developer, is a very faithful record of the electron image (at least up to moderate optical densities, e.g. ~ 2.0) since the response of photographic emulsions to electrons under these conditions is linear (Valentine, 1966). The image optical densities must be digitized over the whole area of the specimen required. This is usually a square (or rectangular) area. It can be an array of dimension 2" if simple Fast Fourier Transform algorithms are used in the calculation, or any dimension if not. In practice, the exact size and shape is not critical, so the most convenient numbers computationally are used. These are arrays of 256 x 256, 512 × 512 or 1024 × 1024. The sizes of the steps between digitization of optical density, and the size of the sample aperture over which the optical density is averaged by the densitometer, must be sufficiently small to sample the detail present in the image at fine enough intervals (see DoRosier and Moore, 1970). Normally, a circular (or square) sample aperture of diameter (or length of side)equalto the step between digitization is used. This avoids digitizing overlapping points, without missing any of the information recorded in the image. The size of the sample aperture and digitization step depends on the ma~nlfmation selected (see p. 193 ). A value of 1⁄4to-~rd of the required lima of resolution (measured in microns on the emulsion) is normally ideal, since it avoids having too many numbers (and therefore wasting computer time)

[Page 49]

3-D structure determination by electron microscopy of 2-D crystals

without losing anything during the measurement procedure. For a 40,000 x image, on which a resolution of 20 A at the specimen is required, a step size of 20 ~(ffi~ x (20 x 40,000/10,000)) would be suitable. To ensure that it is always possible to compare the real and densitometered images (e.g. when determining the absolute hand), care should be taken to orient the films the same way during densitometry.; or at least to keep a record. The emulsion should be towards the densitometer objective lens since the film or plate backing is usually so thick that the image viewed through the backing is blurred. It will frequently be the case that a densitometered image after Fourier transformation in the computer will contain spots visible to a higher resolution than observed by optical diffraction. This will happen because any irregularities in the thickness of the gelatin or plastic backing of which the emulsion is made cause extra noise or a higher background in the optical diffractometer (which is sensitive to phase differences of the transmitted fight waves), whereas the densitometer measures only the optical density due to developed grains of silver. On the other hand, if d~nsitometry is carelessly carried out, the computer transform may well be worse than that seen by optical diffraction. Care should therefore be taken at the stage of densitometry with the following checklist. (a) Focus the densitometer accurately on the grains of the emulsion. Ensure that the accurate focus is maintained over the entire area to be measured (i.e. that the film is held completely fiat.) (b) Select proper sampling aperture and step size to sample finely enough for required resolution. (c) Do not illuminate an excessive area of the film. The excess illumination causes unnecessary fight scattering and gives underestimates of high optical densities. (d) Check linearity, the photomultiplier or photodiode noise, and positional accuracy of the densitometer at reasonably frequent intervals. For those interested in a deeper understanding of the properties of photographic emulsions and microdensitometry, the book by Dainty and Shaw (1974) is excellent.
