[Page 1]

RNA polymerase II transcription compartments: from multivalent chromatin binding to liquid droplet formation? Karsten Rippe

✉ and Argyris Papantonis

✉

Recent studies invoke phase separation as a mechanism underlying the formation of ‘transcriptional condensates’. However, similarities between transcriptional condensates and the previously introduced ‘transcription factories’ model raise the question of what distinguishes the two models. One crucial aspect to consider is the contribution of intrinsically disordered regions in transcription-​relevant factors.

Division of Chromatin Networks, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and Bioquant, Heidelberg, Germany. Translational Epigenetics Group, Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

✉e-​mail: karsten.rippe@ dkfz.de; argyris.papantonis@ med.uni-goettingen.de https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41580-021-00401-6

In cell nuclei, concentration gradients equilibrate within seconds owing to fast diffusion of macromolecules. Thus, one would expect proteins and RNA involved in transcription to become homogeneously distributed as soon as they are released from chromatin. However, transcription by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) was shown already in the early 1990s to preferentially occur in distinct 50–180 nm nuclear foci of active Pol II holo enzymes named ‘transcription factories’1. Approximately 1,000–2,500 such factories can be detected per nucleus, depending on cell type. Active Pol II in its preinitiation state at these loci displays residence times of ~10 seconds, whereas elongating Pol II is stably bound to the DNA until a transcript is synthesized1,2. The mechanisms guid ing the assembly of Pol II transcription compartments, however, remained enigmatic. A recent suggestion is that RNA polymerases, promoter and enhancer sequences and associated factors undergo phase separation through multivalent interactions, to create an exclusionary local protein–RNA environment with characteristic physico chemical properties3–6. A frequently used, yet simplistic analogy for this process is the demixing of oil in water. Inside cells, phase-​separated foci can be described as macromolecules of flexibly associating polymers that are patterned with interaction-​prone motifs separated by more-​inert segments3,6. In particular, protein intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) and RNA fit well in such a ‘stickers-​and-​spacers’ model6. Above a critical concen tration threshold, multivalent IDR and RNA interactions can induce separation into a dense polymer phase, which coexists with a diluted, polymer-​depleted phase. Mol ecules in the dense phase have liquid-​like properties if interactions are weak and transient, but they can adopt gel-​like or solid-​like states with reduced mobility as interaction strength increases6. Can this mechanism

Nature Reviews | Molecular Cell Biology

explain how Pol II transcription is spatially confined to certain parts of the nucleus and the genome?

Are Pol II transcription factories liquid droplets? The characteristics of chromatin affect the structure of active Pol II clusters. At the μm scale, chromatin has mostly solid-​like properties as its polymeric nature restricts nucleosome to 50–100 nm movements2. A par simonious transcription factory assembly would thus involve (cooperative) binding of proteins and RNA onto a mostly immobile chromatin scaffold. The result ing complex would nevertheless be highly dynamic as the residence time of most factors on chromatin is lim ited to just a few seconds2. Protein–protein interactions involving these chromatin-​bound factors may occur at a distance to establish bivalent bridging interactions and loop out parts of the nucleosome chain1,2. Thus, the folded chromatin template itself (likely influenced by transcription-​linked forces) defines a transcription compartment comprising directly and indirectly bound factors that bring enhancers and promoters into spatial proximity1,2. A feature suggested from the physical per sistence of such a compartment during transcript elon gation is it that the DNA template is reeled through the factory (as opposed to Pol II translocating along a mostly static chromatin), and co-​transcription of the different Pol II units locally accumulates RNA. Alternatively, Pol II, transcription factors and cis-​regulatory sequences could assemble through phase separation into transcriptional condensates around chromatin-​bound factors serving as nucleation sites3,4,7, similar to water droplets on a spider web. Such a phase separation mechanism provides a novel and intriguing explanation for the previously enigmatic role of the IDRs found in a large fraction of transcription regulators volume 22 | October 2021 | 645

[Page 2]

(for example, the Pol II C-​terminal domain (CTD), general or cell-​type-​specific transcription factors, and transcription co-activators such as Mediator and BRD4). By driving phase separation, IDRs can maintain a high local concentration of all necessary factors with a sharp boundary with the nucleoplasm. IDR-​mediated multi valent interactions may also keep promoter and enhanc ers in (transient) proximity through the assembly of liquid droplet to amplify transcription activation3–7. Hence, invoking phase separation does not oppose the core of the transcription factory model, but rather provides a mechanism for the maintenance of high local concentrations of the transcription machinery in transcriptionally active foci. Another feature of transcription factories, which was uncovered using electron spectroscopic imaging, is that active polymerases decorate the periphery of a protein-​rich core1. Using optogenetic tools, the tran scription factor TAF15 was shown to prime particular loci for activation, and light-​induced formation through phase separation of ectopic TAF15–Pol II droplets on chromatin amplified the expression of particular loci7. Notably, actively transcribing polymerases therein adopt a topology similar to that described for transcription factories: they concentrate at the periphery of these phase-​separated clusters, the core of which being rich in transcription factors and (presumably) in co-​activators7. Here too, the two models share a common feature.

The contribution of IDRs to Pol II clusters IDR-​mediated assembly of transcription compartments through phase separation is a novel feature not included in the original Pol II factory model. By varying the affinity and the number and density of IDR–IDR and DNA–transcription factor interactions, sharp thresholds for the occurrence of phase separation can be defined4. Whether these conditions are indeed fulfilled at endog enous transcribed loci in living cells is a critical ques tion. Most experimental assays affirming the formation of liquid droplets are performed in vitro or in artificial contexts. Moreover, even live-​cell imaging studies have predominantly focused on μm-​size condensates, which constitute a clear minority inside nuclei compared with the ~100-​nm clusters of active Pol II (marked by hyper-​phosphorylation of Ser5 in their CTD)1. Is then the main function of IDRs to drive phase separation, or do they promote transcription initiation even below the critical concentration regime required for the for mation of phase-​separated transcriptional condensates? Work from a carefully conducted recent study in yeast is particularly instructive for discussing possible IDR functions8. The study showed that shortening the Pol II CTD reduced gene expression and transcription burst ing. Remarkably, this phenotype could be reverted by simply fusing the phase-​separation-​prone FUS or TAF15 IDRs to the end of shortened CTDs, which also rescued the ability of Pol II to cluster. One interpretation of these findings is that it is suf ficient to simply restore the formation of Pol II droplets through these fusions to allow for efficient and accurate

646 | October 2021 | volume 22

transcription. However, considering the FUS and TAF15 IDRs as standalone, functionally independent modules that drive phase separation might be a misrepresentation of their function in vivo. It is also difficult to imagine how their substitution of the CTD would mimic the Pol II CTD phosphorylation code associated with the transi tion of Pol II into an active state. Given that both FUS and TAF15 can interact with the Pol II CTD9, they could sim ply directly replace an activating function that is other wise mediated by the CTD. Furthermore, as previously proposed, unstructured domains can reduce the occur rence of unproductive encounters between two diffusing macromolecules in a ‘wrong’ steric orientation10. In this scenario, IDRs would be interchangeable as they simply serve to stabilize an intermediate state that increases the kinetic rate for forming specific interactions during the assembly of multi-​subunit complexes such as the Pol II preinitiation complex or the Mediator complex. Such an IDR function would be unrelated to phase separation. In-​depth analyses are needed to examine whether IDR-​mediated interactions are exploited inside cells to drive phase separation, or whether the interactions they mediate are sufficient to drive transcription below the critical factor concentration thresholds required for phase separation. Furthermore, it would be important to elucidate how phase separation might accommodate the dynamic functional transitions that enable efficient elongation, co-​transcriptional splicing and transcription termination within Pol II clusters. Addressing such ques tions and revisiting the founding model of transcription factories and its associated experimental data could help to attain a more holistic view of how transcription is organized in nuclear space and time. Papantonis, A. & Cook, P. R. Transcription factories: genome organization and gene regulation. Chem. Rev. 113, 8683–8705 (2013). Rippe, K. Liquid–liquid phase separation in chromatin. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a040683 (2021). Hnisz, D., Shrinivas, K., Young, R. A., Chakraborty, A. K. & Sharp, P. A. A phase separation model for transcriptional control. Cell 169, 13–23 (2017). Shrinivas, K. et al. Enhancer features that drive formation of transcriptional condensates. Mol. Cell 75, 549–561 (2019). Banani, S. F., Lee, H. O., Hyman, A. A. & Rosen, M. K. Biomolecular condensates: organizers of cellular biochemistry. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 285–298 (2017). Choi, J. M., Holehouse, A. S. & Pappu, R. V. Physical principles underlying the complex biology of intracellular phase transitions. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 49, 107–133 (2020). Wei, M. T. et al. Nucleated transcriptional condensates amplify gene expression. Nat. Cell Biol. 22, 1187–1196 (2020). Quintero-​Cadena, P., Lenstra, T. L. & Sternberg, P. W. RNA pol II length and disorder enable cooperative scaling of transcriptional bursting. Mol. Cell 79, 207–220 (2020). Janke, A. M. et al. Lysines in the RNA polymerase II C-​terminal domain contribute to TAF15 fibril recruitment. Biochemistry 57, 2549–2563 (2018). 10. Pontius, B. W. Close encounters: why unstructured, polymeric domains can increase rates of specific macromolecular association. Trends Biochem. Sci. 18, 181–186 (1993).

Acknowledgements The work of K.R. on phase separation is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) in Priority Program 2191 ‘Molecular Mechanisms of Functional Phase Separation’ via grant RI1283/16-1. A.P. is also supported by the DFG via the Priority Program 2202 ‘Spatial Genome Architecture in Development and Disease’ (Project 422389065) and the TRR81 Collaborative Research Center (Project 109546710).

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
