[Page 1]

Leading Edge

3D genome, on repeat: Higher-order folding principles of the heterochromatinized repetitive genome Spencer A. Haws,1,2,3,4 Zoltan Simandi,1,2,3,4 R. Jordan Barnett,1,2,3 and Jennifer E. Phillips-Cremins1,2,3,* 1Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 2Epigenetics Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 3Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 4These authors contributed equally *Correspondence: jcremins@seas.upenn.edu https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.06.052

SUMMARY

Nearly half of the human genome is comprised of diverse repetitive sequences ranging from satellite repeats to retrotransposable elements. Such sequences are susceptible to stepwise expansions, duplications, inversions, and recombination events which can compromise genome function. In this review, we discuss the higher-order folding mechanisms of compartmentalization and loop extrusion and how they shape, and are shaped by, heterochromatin. Using primarily mammalian model systems, we contrast mechanisms governing H3K9me3-mediated heterochromatinization of the repetitive genome and highlight emerging links between repetitive elements and chromatin folding.

HETEROCHROMATIN: A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON PROPERTIES, MECHANISMS, AND FUNCTIONS Eukaryotic genomes are broadly partitioned into heterochromatin and euchromatin. The existence of heterochromatin was first reported by Emil Heitz in 1928 as high-intensity staining of DNA dye throughout the cell cycle in specific genome fragments (Heitz, 1928). In the nearly 100 years following Heitz’s initial discovery, the molecular properties and biological roles of heterochromatin have been elucidated in detail (Figure 1, top). Heterochromatin is relatively compact, replicates at the end of S phase, and is refractory to both enzymatic digestion and sonication (Becker et al., 2017; Lima-de-Faria and Jaworska, 1968; Wallrath and Elgin, 1995). A leading theory is that heterochromatin is relatively inaccessible to transcription factors due to its condensed state, and, therefore, the genes it encompasses are transcriptionally silent (Becker et al., 2016). By contrast, euchromatin is gene rich, transcriptionally active, and accessible to DNA binding factors that promote gene expression. Therefore, Heintz’s original observation of heterochromatin as a distinct nuclear feature has stood the test of time over nearly 100 years of imaging, genetics, genome engineering, and sequencing studies. Significant advances have been made in our understanding of the classes of heterochromatin and their interplay with genome function. The causal effect of heterochromatin on gene silencing was demonstrated with classic genetic screens or transgene studies in Drosophila. As early as the 1930s, the phenomenon of position-effect variegation (PEV) was reported in which active genes are stochastically silenced upon ectopic placement in

2690 Cell 185, July 21, 2022 a 2022 Published by Elsevier Inc.

juxtaposition to heterochromatin (Elgin and Reuter, 2013; Muller and Altenburg, 1930). Moreover, in 1949, the inactive X chromosome was observed as a heterochromatinized Barr body to achieve dosage compensation of X-linked genes in females (Barr and Bertram, 1949). These classic studies, among many others, provided early insight which suggested that heterochromatin is generally associated with a repressive role on gene expression. Heterochromatin also plays a chief role in the protection of genome stability by repressing repetitive DNA elements (Peters et al., 2001). Repetitive DNA elements constitute 54% of the human genome (Hoyt et al., 2022). Since the initial discovery of mobile transposable elements (TEs) in maize (McClintock, 1950), several other repetitive elements has been identified in eukaryotic genomes, including short and long interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs and LINEs, respectively) (Kit, 1961; Schmid and Deininger, 1975), pericentromeric and centromeric satellite repeats (Tyler-Smith and Brown, 1987), telomeric repeats (Blackburn and Gall, 1978), retroviral sequences (Martin et al., 1981), and short tandem repeats (STRs) (La Spada et al., 1991; Oberlé et al., 1991; Verkerk et al., 1991; Yu et al., 1991) (Figure 1, bottom). Targeted repression of repetitive elements is critical to counter their propensity for instability events (e.g., stepwise expansions, duplications, inversions, and recombination). Thus, heterochromatin has a critical role in controlling genome function at the interface between gene expression and repeat stability. Heterochromatin can be earmarked by multiple known chromatin modifications. Repetitive DNA is packaged into what is canonically referred to as ‘‘constitutive heterochromatin,’’ a transcriptionally silent chromatin state characterized by the crosstalk

[Page 2]

Figure 1. History of classic heterochromatin and repetitive genome discoveries Key principles of heterochromatin acquisition, maintenance, and function since the initial discovery in 1928 by Emil Heitz (top). In parallel, insights into the abundance, regulation, and function of repetitive elements have also come to light, including Barbara McClintock’s 1950 foundational discovery of mobile genetic elements in maize and recent reports of the first gapless human genome (bottom). Crosstalk between heterochromatin and the repetitive genome has emerged as understanding has accumulated in both disciplines.

between H3 Lys-9 tri-methylation (H3K9me3) and DNA methylation (Millán-Zambrano et al., 2022; Saksouk et al., 2015). Constitutive heterochromatin at telomeres and pericentromeres condenses vulnerable repetitive regions in an invariant manner across developmental lineages and phases of the cell cycle. H3K9me3 can also be developmentally regulated, as genomewide changes in occupancy patterns have been linked to gene expression changes during mammalian differentiation and reprogramming (Magklara et al., 2011; Nicetto et al., 2019; Soufi et al., 2012). Moreover, cell-type-specific heterochromatin

marked by the histone modification H3 Lys-27 tri-methylation (H3K27me3) plays a critical role in developmentally regulated gene expression (Millán-Zambrano et al., 2022). Together, these data highlight that distinct heterochromatin signatures can exhibit context-specific constitutive and developmentally regulated patterns of acquisition and maintenance in the mammalian genome. An open question at the forefront of the last several decades has been the mechanisms governing context-specific deposition and maintenance of heterochromatin modifications. In the case of H3K9me3, genetic screens in Drosophila and S. Pombe identified

[Page 3]

Figure 2. Interplay between higher-order chromatin organization and heterochromatin Mammalian genomes are folded into (A) A/B compartments, (B) chromatin-associated subnuclear bodies, (C) topologically associating domains (TADs), (D) subTADs, and (E) long-range looping interactions. (F) TADs/subTADs formed by cohesin-mediated loop extrusion manifest as corner-dot TADs/subTADs in ensemble Hi-C maps, whereas dot-less TADs/subTADs have weaker boundaries or are formed by cohesin-independent mechanisms. (G) Loop extrusion is refractory to B compartment and heterochromatin domain formation (based on Haarhuis et al. [2022]).

more than fifty candidate genetic loci—termed Su(Var) group genes—as suppressors of PEV (Allshire et al., 1995; Reuter and Spierer, 1992). Two such genes—SUV39H1 and SUV39H2— encode histone methyltransferases (HMTs) which selectively methylate H3K9 in mammals. Gain- and loss-of-function studies for SUV39H1/2 have demonstrated their causal role in methylating H3K9 in mammalian cell lines (Firestein et al., 2000; Melcher et al., 2000; Rea et al., 2000). Another HMT, SET domain bifurcated histone lysine methyltransferase 1 (SETDB1), also possesses H3K9specific tri-methylation activity (Schultz et al., 2002). In addition to HMTs, eukaryotes employ histone demethylases (HDMs) for targeted methyl-group removal, and the mammalian Jumonji domain-containing protein 2 (JMJD2/KDM4) isoforms A–D were identified as H3K9me3 HDM enzymes (reviewed in Kooistra and Helin [2012]). Similarly, H3K27me3 is also deposited in a celltype-specific manner by the HMT activity of specific subunits of the Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) (Yu et al., 2019), and can be removed by HDM KDM6 isoforms A–B (Kooistra and Helin, 2012). The existence of evolutionarily conserved H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 writers and erasers highlights the likely importance of precise spatiotemporal regulation of heterochromatin during mammalian development and adulthood. In this review, we highlight the contrasting higher-order folding patterns of compartmentalization and loop extrusion and their interplay with repressive heterochromatin in the three-dimensional (3D) nucleus. In light of the first gapless, complete genome assembly created by the Telomere-toTelomere (T2T) consortium (Hoyt et al., 2022), we summarize the diversity of repetitive DNA sequences and mobile genetic

elements in the human genome. Using primarily mammalian model systems, we compare and contrast the mechanisms of H3K9me3-mediated heterochromatinization of repetitive elements and highlight emerging evidence suggesting a link between genome folding and the repetitive genome. HIGHER-ORDER FOLDING PATTERNS OF REPRESSIVE HETEROCHROMATIN Technological advances in imaging, sequencing, and computational biology over the last two decades have revealed that heterochromatin not only functions in a linear fashion as described above, but also in concert with higher-order genome folding structures. As imaging and sequencing technologies enabled the creation of genome-wide, ultra-high-kilobase-resolution maps of chromatin folding in single cells, we now have the ability to detect genome-wide locations of A/B compartments, subnuclear bodies, topologically associating domains (TADs), subTADs, and loops across many mammalian cell types (Figure 2). Here we discuss whether and how each distinct genome folding pattern is shaped by and informs H3K9me3mediated heterochromatin—and the mechanistic principles underlying the establishment and maintenance of each folding feature. B compartments can be established via HP1a Compartments were originally identified in ensemble Hi-C maps binned at 1 Megabase resolution as a chromosome-wide plaid pattern of ultra-long-range intra-chromosomal and inter-

[Page 4]

chromosomal contacts (Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009; Rao et al., 2014) (Figure 2A). The plaid pattern has been interpreted to suggest genome partitioning into A compartments of euchromatin and B compartments enriched for heterochromatin (Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009). As Hi-C data has increased in read depth and quality over the last decade, it has enabled the additional partitioning of 1 kilobase-binned mammalian genomes into several subtypes of smaller sub-compartments marked by signature combinations of active and repressive chromatin modifications (Liu et al., 2021; Rao et al., 2014; Spracklin et al., 2021). Super-resolution and widefield imaging experiments with Oligopaints DNA fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probes verified compartments independently via direct visualization in situ (Bintu et al., 2018; Mateo et al., 2019; Takei et al., 2021; Nir et al., 2018). Compartmentalization has also been observed in C. elegans and Drosophila (Bian et al., 2020; Rowley et al., 2017), suggesting that it may be an essential feature of genome folding across mammalian and non-mammalian eukaryotic organisms. Following their initial stratification into A and B states (Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009), compartments were further classified into multiple sub-compartments (e.g., A1, A2, B1, B2, B3) based on their combinations of chromatin modifications, DNA replication timing, and association with subnuclear structures (i.e., nuclear lamina and nucleolus) (Liu et al., 2021; Rao et al., 2014). B compartments are generally heterochromatic and gene poor and have since been stratified into sub-B compartments marked by (1) H3K9me3, HP1a, and HP1b; (2) H3K9me2 (but not H3K9me3) and the H2A.Z histone variant; or (3) H3K27me3 and PRC 1 and 2 (Spracklin et al., 2021). By contrast, A compartments are euchromatic and encompass accessible, gene-dense DNA enriched for histone modifications linked to transcriptional activation (e.g. H3K27ac and H3K4me3). Although the full identification of sub-compartment subtypes in each cell type is ongoing, these data indicate that multiple different heterochromatin mechanisms exist within the generalized B compartment, and thus they should be sub-stratified by signatures of chromatin marks when ascertaining function. The mechanisms underlying B compartment formation are an active area of investigation. The adaptor protein heterochromatin protein 1 homolog alpha (HP1a) binds to H3K9me3 to maintain heterochromatin via the direct recruitment of additional effectors across the cell cycle and in development (Bannister et al., 2001; Lachner et al., 2001; Nakayama et al., 2001). HP1a has been directly implicated in the establishment of B compartments during the early developmental stage of zygotic genome activation (ZGA) in the Drosophila embryo (Zenk et al., 2021). Depletion of HP1a during ZGA causes a 20% decrease in B compartment strength and disrupted trans interactions between pericentromeric regions (Zenk et al., 2021). However, its knockdown does not perturb genome folding in somatic Drosophila S2 cells, thus suggesting that it is required for establishment and not maintenance of B compartments. Computational modeling of HP1a-H3K9me3-dependent chromatin compaction is only partially capable of reproducing the distinctive alternating plaid pattern exhibited by A/B compartments on Hi-C maps, suggesting additional organizing mechanisms may be involved (MacPherson et al., 2018). The apparent discrepancy might in part

be explained by the ability of HP1a to nucleate into spherical droplets exhibiting the physical properties of liquid-like, membraneless condensates (Larson et al., 2017; Strom et al., 2017). Liquid-like droplets of HP1a can condense a stretched fragment of linear DNA into a dense focal point in vitro, thus raising the possibility that B compartments could form in principle through phase separation. Biochemical studies indicate that the ability of human HP1a to form liquid-like droplets is dependent on binding to DNA via its intrinsically disordered hinge region and N-terminal HP1a phosphorylation (Larson et al., 2017). While observations from these and other studies are suggestive of a role for HP1a in the establishment of B compartments via oligomerization or phase separation mechanisms, more perturbative gain and loss of function studies will ascertain the extent of HP1a0 s role in B compartment establishment in mouse and human systems across developmental stages. H3K9me2/3 is necessary and sufficient for formation of LADs The association of genomic loci with the nuclear lamina in lamina-associated domains (LADs) was reported using a DNA adenine methyltransferase-based assay (DamID) targeting B-type lamin proteins first in Drosophila Kc cells (Pickersgill et al., 2006) (Figure 2B). DamID was subsequently modified to target lamin B1 in Tig3 human lung fibroblasts, revealing that LADs are approximately 100 kb–10 Mb in size and span up to 40% of the human genome (Guelen et al., 2008). It is well established that LADs correlate with repressed genes and B compartments, and localization to the nuclear periphery has long been discussed as a model for gene silencing (van Steensel and Belmont, 2017). The mechanisms by which LADs are established and maintained are of significant importance for understanding H3K9me2/3 deposition. LADs are enriched for H3K9me2/3 and reduction of H3K9me2/3 via depletion or inhibition of H3K9 HMTs results in disruption of chromatin contacts with the nuclear periphery across model organisms (Bian et al., 2013, 2020; Harr et al., 2015; Towbin et al., 2012). Moreover, dCas9 targeting of the HMT G9afor genomic locus-specific H3K9 di-methylation promotes lamina interactions in a methyltransferase-activitydependent manner (See et al., 2020). HP1a is a candidate in the establishment of the interface between H3K9me2/3 and the lamina, as it binds directly to H3K9me2/3 through its chromodomain and can also bind directly to lamina-associated proteins (Holla et al., 2020; Ye et al., 1997). Together, these collective observations suggest a possible model where H3K9me2/3 is sufficient for the establishment and necessary for the maintenance of chromatin-lamina associations. The functional relationship between gene expression and LAD localization remains an open question. In mammalian systems, thousands of genes are localized within LADs, and the majority are actively repressed or transcriptionally inactive (Leemans et al., 2019). Artificial tethering to LADs results in silencing of specific genes, which supports the argument that positioning at the periphery instructs gene expression (Finlan et al., 2008; Reddy et al., 2008). However, it is not yet fully clear whether specific lamina proteins or H3K9me2/3 drive silencing given the complexity of experiments decoupling periphery localization

[Page 5]

with the factors involved. For example, depletion of lamina components does not typically lead to significant changes in gene expression (Amendola and van Steensel, 2015; Solovei et al., 2013). Moreover, at least 10% of genes in LADs retain their expression, and many such ‘‘escaper’’ genes are locally detached from the lamina and depleted of H3K9me2/3 signal, suggesting that mechanisms also exist for transcription to overcome the conventionally repressive environment at the nuclear periphery (Guelen et al., 2008; Leemans et al., 2019). Together, these studies suggest that tethering to the nuclear lamina can be causally linked to gene expression silencing but that there are escapee genes which are exceptions to this general rule. An emerging diversity of subnuclear bodies exhibits distinct heterochromatin and genome-function signatures In addition to compartments and LADs, chromatin loci can spatially co-localize with proteinaceous sub-nuclear bodies including nuclear pores, nuclear speckles, stress granules, and nucleoli-associated proteins (Figure 2B). For example, nucleolus-associated domains (NADs) were discovered by highthroughput sequencing of genomic DNA associated with purified nucleoli (Németh et al., 2010; van Koningsbruggen et al., 2010). NADs can encompass as much as 4% of the human genome and are enriched for repetitive ribosomal RNA genes, pericentromeric and centromeric satellite repeats, and specific telomere arms (Németh et al., 2010; Su et al., 2020). NADs can overlay with the heterochromatin marks of H3K9me3 (Type I) or H3K27me3 (Type II) (Bersaglieri et al., 2022; Vertii et al., 2019). Type I NADs have been hypothesized to facilitate repression and stabilization of repetitive DNA elements, whereas Type II NADs have been implicated in developmentally regulated gene expression (Vertii et al., 2019). The nucleolus might also exhibit the biophysical properties of liquid-like droplets (Frottin et al., 2019; Lafontaine et al., 2021), consistent with the possibility that repetitive elements may associate in the nucleolus via phase separation mechanisms. The roles and mechanisms by which nucleolar associated DNA can be heterochromatinized and silenced remains and exciting area for future investigation. Recently, the development of new genomics and computational technologies brought to light that repressive sub-compartments could be further refined beyond the foundational B1, B2, and B3 convention (Liu et al., 2021; Quinodoz et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021). Tyramide signal amplification sequencing (TSA-seq) directly measures the cytological distance of chromatin fragments to nuclear bodies such as speckles or stress granules (Chen et al., 2018). The spatial position inference of the nuclear genome (SPIN) computational method integrates data from TSA-seq for speckles and the nuclear lamina, Hi-C, and DamID for the lamina and nucleolus and has successfully identified at least 4 active and 6 repressive subtypes of nuclear bodies (Wang et al., 2021) (Figure 2B). These observations open up new questions as to whether and how specific subnuclear bodies functionally contribute to or might be shaped by gene expression and heterochromatinization. The coupling of TSAseq with synthetic biology technologies such as CRISPRgenome organization (CRISPR-GO) (Wang et al., 2018b) or light-activated-dynamic-looping (LADL) (Kim et al., 2019) to

tether specific genomic segments to the nuclear periphery and subnuclear bodies will be critical for addressing these underexplored concepts. As genomics and computational technologies continue to advance, the granularity with which repressive subcompartments are classified will improve, allowing mechanistic and functional perturbative studies to precisely dissect the genome’s structure-function relationship. TADs and subTADs formed via loop extrusion antagonize B compartments and heterochromatin Within larger A/B compartments and subnuclear bodies, the mammalian genome folds into TADs and subTADs (Dixon et al., 2012; Nora et al., 2012; Phillips-Cremins et al., 2013; Sexton et al., 2012). As defined algorithmically in low-resolution Hi-C data, TADs are Mb-scale domains in which genomic fragments have a higher interaction frequency with themselves compared to loci outside of the domains (Figure 2C). TADs and their nested subMb-sized counterparts subTADs (Figure 2D) are demarcated by boundaries—which are molecularly distinct regions of the genome refractory to permitting chromatin interactions between up and downstream genomic loci (Beagan and Phillips-Cremins, 2020; Norton and Phillips-Cremins, 2017; Phillips-Cremins, 2014) (orange segments, Figures 2C and 2D). Although TADs were initially reported as conserved across cell types, evidence is mounting that TAD and subTAD boundaries can vary significantly in strength across cell types and in disease (Beagan et al., 2016, 2017, 2020; Norton et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2018). Over the last decade, major progress has been made toward understanding the molecular mechanisms that regulate TAD/ subTAD formation (reviewed in detail in Beagan and Phillips-Cremins [2020]). Many TADs and subTADs are formed by the cohesin-based mechanism of loop extrusion in which the subunits of the structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) proteins form a ring-like structure which progressively moves in an ATP-dependent manner along the genome and reels flanking loci through the inner diameter of its ring (Figure 2E) (Banigan and Mirny, 2020; Davidson and Peters, 2021). Long-range looping interactions form when the cohesin complex stalls at TAD/ subTAD boundaries bound by the architectural protein CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) (Figure 2E) (Davidson et al., 2016; Fudenberg et al., 2016; Sanborn et al., 2015). Extrusionbased long-range looping interactions manifest structurally in ensemble Hi-C maps as dots, and, therefore, TADs/subTADs formed by extrusion exhibit corner-dots (Figure 2F). Due to the transient nature of loop extrusion, a corner dot feature is not always readily detectable in TADs formed by extrusion at a population level (Beagan and Phillips-Cremins, 2020; Emerson et al., 2022; Rao et al., 2017). The majority of dot-like structure-indicative loops are lost upon short-term knockdown of CTCF and cohesin protein levels, thus reinforcing that these factors are essential for loop establishment and maintenance (Nora et al., 2017; Rao et al., 2017; Schwarzer et al., 2017). Hereinafter, we refer to TADs/subTADS as all domain-like structures in Hi-C and single-cell imaging data which form mechanistically via loop-extrusion mechanisms—but we note that CTCF/cohesinindependent mechanisms of TAD, subTAD, and loop formation are an active area of intense investigation.

[Page 6]

Figure 3. Types and distribution of repetitive DNA elements across the human genome (A) The human genome consists of 54% repetitive sequences. Class I repeats comprise retrotransposable elements, including long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs, grey), short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs, dark orange), and long terminal repeat (LTR) endogenous retroviruses (ERVs, light orange). The human genome has primarily one abundant LINE, LINE-1, that is 6 kb long and encodes its own requisite reverse transcription and transposition machinery. The most common class of SINE elements in the human genome are the 280-bp-long Alu-SINEs which are non-autonomous and rely on LINE-1 encoded machinery to facilitate their transposition. ERV remnants are present in the human genome in fragments (HERVs) and in some cases can be actively transcribed. Tandem repeats are non-mobile DNA sequences in which the copies of one or more nucleotides are repeated in a head-to-tail manner. They are distributed throughout the genome and are most prevalent as satellite repeats at pericentromeric and centromeric chromatin regions. (B) The recent gapless telomere-to-telomere (T2T) human genome assembly consists of assemblies for all 22 human autosomes and chromosome X and comprises 3.05 gigabase pairs (Gbp) of nuclear DNA (CHM13v1) (adapted from Nurk et al. [2022]). Bar plot, recent T2T estimates of the percentage of the human genome made up of each repeat class. TSD, target site duplication; ORF, open reading frame; EN, endonuclease; RT, reverse transcriptase; A and B, split Pol III RNA promoter; LTR, long terminal repeats; Gag, group antigens; Prt, protease; Pol2, reverse transcriptase; Env, envelope protein.

It is established that the loss of cohesin-based loop extrusion leads to gained compartments in the mammalian genome (Nora et al., 2017; Rao et al., 2017; Schwarzer et al., 2017). Knockdown of subunits of both the Mediator and cohesin complex leads to lost loops, increased genome compartmentalization, and increases in heterochromatin domain formation (Figure 2G) (Haarhuis et al., 2022). Knockdown of the Setdb1 H3K9 HMT in mammalian neurons results in lost H3K9me3 and gained ectopic binding of CTCF (Jiang et al., 2017). Moreover, stabilization of chromatin loops by knock-down of the cohesin-unloading factor wings apart-like protein homolog (WAPL) can result in ablation of heterochromatin domains and a decrease in compartmentalization (Figure 2G) (Haarhuis et al., 2017, 2022). Altogether, these observations raise the possibility that stabilization of chromatin loops can counteract the formation of B compartments and sug-

gest that mechanisms driving the loss or gain of chromatin loops could actively shape heterochromatin. LINEAR HETEROCHROMATINIZATION OF THE REPETITIVE GENOME Repeat composition of the complete gapless human genome assembly The recent T2T-CHM13 human genome assembly released by the Telomere-to-Telomere (T2T) consortium offers the most accurate estimation to date regarding the composition of the repetitive genome (Figure 3). Repetitive sequences comprise 54% of the T2T-CHM13v1 assembly (Figure 3A-B) (Hoyt et al., 2022; Nurk et al., 2022). Transposable elements (TEs) are mobile DNA sequences capable of integrating into new genomic loci

[Page 7]

and are the largest class of repetitive DNA elements. Class I TEs, or retrotransposable elements (RTEs) including long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs), short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs), and long terminal repeat (LTR) endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), are dominant in the CHM13v1 assembly due to their ‘‘copy-and-paste’’ mechanism where an RNA intermediate is reverse transcribed to cDNA prior to its integration into a new genomic locus (Chuong et al., 2017). By contrast, class II TEs, or DNA transposons, leverage a ‘‘cut-and-paste’’ mechanism where terminal internal repeats are bound by the self-encoded transposase, facilitating TE excision and reintegration into a new genomic locus (Chuong et al., 2017). Non-mobile repetitive DNA sequences, including pericentric and centromeric satellite repeats, short tandem repeats (STRs), and variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs), also occur at high frequency in the human genome. We anticipate that as our knowledge of the complexity and diversity of repetitive sequences among individuals increases, it will transform our understanding of the functions and roles for the repetitive genome in phenotypic variation in the coming years. Repetitive elements threaten genome stability due to their susceptibility to stepwise expansions, duplications, inversions, and recombination events (Lupski and Stankiewicz, 2005). A principal role for H3K9me3 is the repression of repetitive DNA sequences and mobile genetic elements. Such mechanisms are a double-edged sword, however, because some repetitive elements have evolved to regulate their host’s genomes (reviewed in detail in Hermant and Torres-Padilla [2021] and Sundaram and Wysocka [2020]). Here, we discuss the distinguishing features of satellite repeats, STRs and VNTRs, and RTEs, as well as the linear H3K9-related heterochromatic mechanisms regulating their accessibility and expression. Pericentromeric satellite repeat tracts: Crosstalk between H3K9me3 and DNA methylation facilitates silencing In both humans and mice, pericentromeric and centromeric DNA is enriched for repetitive satellite repeat sequences (reviewed in Thakur et al. [2021]). Human centromeric DNA is enriched for repetitive a-satellite repeat tracts consisting of 171-bp monomer subunits. In their most simple form, a-satellite repeat units are dimers, but they can also be found in greater repeating arrays known as higher-order repeats. Mouse centromeric DNA contains primarily minor satellite (MiSat) tracts consisting of repeating 120-bp subunits. In human pericentromeres, there are 6 unique classes of satellite sequences: satellites I (17- and 25-bp), satellites II (10- to 80-bp), satellites III (5- and 10-bp), a-satellites (171-bp), b-satellites (68-bp), and g-satellites (220bp). Mouse pericentromeres are predominantly populated by major satellite (MajSat) tracts comprised of a repeating 234-bp subunit. As long-read sequencing and alignment technologies continue to improve, the further characterization of satellite repeat tract diversity and structure represents an exciting area for future scientific exploration. Although centromeric repeats are actively transcribed and generally remain accessible to facilitate kinetochore assembly (McKinley and Cheeseman, 2016), the satellite repeats within pericentromeres are constitutively heterochromatinized by

H3K9me2/3 and 5-methylcytosine (5mC) DNA methylation (reviewed in Thakur et al. [2021]). In mammals, H3K9me3 is deposited at pericentromeres by SUV39H1/2 HMTs (Peters et al., 2001; Maison et al., 2011; Rice et al., 2003) and can be recognized by the chromodomain of HP1a (Bannister et al., 2001; Lachner et al., 2001; Nakayama et al., 2001) (Figure 4A). HP1a can co-immunoprecipitate with the H3K9me3 HMTs SUV39H1/ 2 and SETDB1, as well as the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3b in mammalian cell lines (Lehnertz et al., 2003; Maeda and Tachibana, 2022; Smallwood et al., 2007) (Figure 4A). Double knockout of SUV39H1 and SUV39H2 in HeLa cells results in the depletion of H3K9me3 and HP1a on chromatin (Johnson et al., 2017). Once localized to pericentromeres, HP1a functions as an adaptor protein to facilitate heterochromatin spreading by acting as a scaffold for the recruitment of additional heterochromatin effectors (Lechner et al., 2005; Smothers and Henikoff, 2000). The mechanisms by which HMTs, DNMTs, HP1a, and other chromatin effectors interplay to heterochromatinize mammalian pericentromeres remain an exciting open question. It is noteworthy that an early study knocking out the mouse enzymes for DNA methylation maintenance (i.e., Dnmt1) or de novo deposition (i.e., Dnmt3a/Dnmt3b double knockout) do not show decreased H3K9me3 at pericentromeres (Lehnertz et al., 2003). By contrast, knock-down of both Suv39h1 and Suv39h2 reduces pericentromeric DNA methylation and de-represses MajSat repeat expression (Lehnertz et al., 2003). Although still under active investigation, this early work suggests that DNA methylation at pericentromeres may occur downstream of H3K9me3. Together, these data suggest a working model of heterochromatin at pericentromeres similar to the non-repetitive genome. In this working model, HP1a associates with H3K9me3 and stabilizes—either directly or indirectly—local H3K9 HMT and DNMT occupancy, resulting in a self-reinforcing cycle of H3K9me3 and DNA methylation (Figure 4A). It is worth pointing out that crosstalk between H3K9me2/3 and 5mC DNA methylation might also occur at pericentromeres independently from HP1a during S phase of the cell cycle via the recruitment of ubiquitin-like PHD and RING finger domain-containing protein 1 (UHRF1). UHRF1 (previously known as NP95 in mice and ICBP90 in humans) co-localizes with 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-dense pericentromeric foci (Fang et al., 2016) and recognizes both H3K9me3 and hemi-5mC DNA generated during replication (Rothbart et al., 2012). Heterochromatin-bound UHRF1 can recruit DNMT1 to facilitate local DNA methylation through two distinct molecular models (Figure 4B). In one leading model, hemi-5mC DNA provides UHRF1 binding specificity, and H3K9me2/3 improves binding affinity (Rothbart et al., 2012). Upon stable binding to existing H3K9me2/3 and hemi-5mC DNA, UHRF1 can recruit DNMT1 via a direct interaction to further mediate DNA methylation maintenance (Achour et al., 2008) (Model A, Figure 4B. Alternatively, it has also been suggested that UHRF1 can ubiquitinate local H3 residues which may then directly recruit DNMT1 to guide DNA methylation maintenance (Model B, Figure 4B) (Ishiyama et al., 2017). In addition to DNMT1, the HMT SUV39H1 can directly associate with UHRF1 in human cells, and UHRF1 knockdown can reduce both SUV39H1 and

[Page 8]

Figure 4. Distinct repeat elements require unique heterochromatinization mechanisms Linear heterochromatin mechanisms play an integral role in repressing both the accessibility and expression of repetitive DNA elements. (A) At pericentric chromatin, H3K9me3 and DNA 5mC cooperate to silence satellite repeats. DNMT3B and the HMT SUV39H1 can be recruited to pericentromeric repeats and co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) with HP1a . (B) The interplay between H3K9me3 and DNA 5mC can occur via two distinct models in a DNA-replication-dependent manner. In model A, UHRF1 is located to DNAP-replicating loci through an interaction with PCNA. At replicating loci, UHRF1 binds hemi-5mC DNA and H3K9me3 where it can recruit DNMT1 via a direct protein interaction for 5mC maintenance. In model B, UHRF1 ubiquitinates histone 3 residues which are recognized by DNMT1, leading to its local recruitment for 5mC maintenance. (C) Transcription of pericentromeric satellite repeats generates ncRNAs that can recruit the HMT SUV39H1 in cis for H3K9me3 deposition. (D) At telomeric short tandem repeats (STRs), TERRA ncRNA can recruit heterochromatin machinery to the TRF2 subunit of the shelterin complex. (E) ERVs are primarily targeted for repression by KRAB-containing zinc finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs) which interact with the corepressor KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1) to facilitate recruitment of additional heterochromatin effector proteins. (F) Actively transcribed young LINE-1s are silenced by the HUSH complex, which recruits the H3K9me3 HMT SETDB1 to chromatin. Prematurely terminated transcripts can be degraded via the HUSH-associated NEXT complex. (G) SINEs can be targeted for H3K9me3-dependent repression by SUV39H1 as well as HP1a. SUV39H1, suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog 1; DNMT3B, DNA methyltransferase 3B; HP1a, heterochromatin protein 1a; UHRF1, ubiquitin-like PHD and RING finger domain-containing protein 1; DNMT1, DNA methyltransferase 1; PCNA, proliferating cell nuclear antigen; DNAP, DNA polymerase; RNAPI, RNA polymerase I; ncRNA, non-coding RNA; TERRA, telomeric repeat-containing RNA; TRF2, telomeric repeat-binding factor 2; ORC1, origin recognition complex subunit 1; ERV, endogenous retroviruses; KRAB, Krüppel-associated box domain containing-zinc-finger proteins; C2H2, Cys-2 His-2 zinc finger; SETDB1, SET domain bifurcated 1; RNAPIII, RNA polymerase II; HUSH, human silencing hub; Transgene activation suppressor; MPP8, M-phase phosphoprotein 8; PPHLN, periphilin; NEXT, nuclear exosome targeting; RNAPIII, RNA polymerase III.

H3K9me3 signal at specific target genes (Babbio et al., 2012). Although the functional role for SUV39H1 recruitment by UHRF1 specifically at pericentromeres requires further explora-

tion, these data raise a potential working model for HP1a-independent maintenance of pericentromeric heterochromatin during S phase via UHRF1.

[Page 9]

Noncoding RNA-mediated H3K9me3 deposition at pericentromeric repeats Although pericentromeric heterochromatin is targeted for constitutive repression, it is not transcriptionally inert. Some of its derived transcripts, such as MajSat non-coding RNA (ncRNA), can remain largely chromatin associated through RNA:DNA hybrids (Velazquez Camacho et al., 2017). Biochemical studies suggest that the N-terminal basic domain of mouse SUV39H2 contains a single-stranded RNA (ssRNAs) recognition module that selectively binds MajSat ncRNA. N-terminal truncation of the ssRNA recognition domain reduces pericentromeric repeat association with SUV39H2 and H3K9me3, suggesting a critical role for MajSat ncRNA in pericentromere heterochromatinization (Velazquez Camacho et al., 2017). Biochemical studies have also shown that human SUV39H1 can interact with a-satellite ncRNA in vitro (Johnson et al., 2017). In contrast to mice, human SUV39H1 binds ssRNA through its chromodomain, as it does not possess an N-terminal RNA binding domain (Johnson et al., 2017). Non-specific RNase A digestion or mutation of the SUV39H1 ssRNA binding domain reduced SUV39H1 enrichment at pericentromeres in HeLa cells, suggesting these ncRNAs may also be critical for heterochromatinization in humans (Figure 4C). Together, these findings support the existence of satellite repeat ncRNA-facilitated heterochromatinization of pericentromeres. An exciting avenue for future inquiry is to dissect and further understand the seemingly discordant relationship between satellite repeat transcription and heterochromatin acquisition and maintenance at mammalian pericentromeres. Local heterochromatin silencing of genes containing unstable STR tracts in a subset of repeat expansion disorders Over 1 million STR tracts, also known as microsatellites, are distributed across the human genome in introns, exons, and intergenic regions (Hannan, 2018). STRs consist of 1–6 bp motifs arranged in tandem (Hannan, 2018). Recent genome-wide studies have revealed that thousands of STRs are polymorphic across individuals and serve as key regulators of gene expression (Gymrek et al., 2016). STR instability occurs at significantly higher rates than single nucleotide mutations, and small changes in tract lengths contribute to the diversity of healthy human phenotypic traits (Ellegren, 2000). Thus, STRs are abundant in the human genome and play important functional roles in development and phenotypic diversity. By a process that is poorly understood, a small number of specific normal-length STRs undergo somatic or germline expansion and transition to long-normal, intermediate, pre-mutation, and mutation STR tract lengths. Unstable expansion of STRs was first reported simultaneously by four independent groups and serves as the mechanistic basis for a growing list of more than 40 inherited repeat expansion disorders, including fragile X syndrome (FXS), Huntington’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Friedreich’s ataxia (La Spada et al., 1991; Oberlé et al., 1991; Verkerk et al., 1991; Yu et al., 1991). Patients with repeat expansion diseases typically suffer from a complex set of neuropsychiatric symptoms such as anxiety, hyperactivity, low IQ, social deficits, and seizures (Orr and Zoghbi, 2007). Understanding the mechanisms governing STR instability is of

immense importance for human health and also an unsolved pathophysiological question. Emerging evidence suggests that heterochromatin acquisition at unstable STRs might stabilize disease-related expansion events. In the prototypic example of FXS, expansion of a CGG STR tract in the 5’UTR of FMR1 expands to mutation length of 200 triplets or more to cause disease (Oberlé et al., 1991; Verkerk et al., 1991; Yu et al., 1991). STR expansion from pre-mutation to mutation length causes transcriptional inhibition of FMR1 and consequent severe reduction in levels of the Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein (FMRP) it encodes. Upon STR expansion above 200 CGGs to full-mutation length, classic models assert that the unstable STR tract undergoes local DNA hypermethylation and heterochromatinization by H3K9me3. Heterochromatinization is thought to stabilize the STR tract, but it also spreads upstream to the FMR1 promoter to cause transcriptional silencing (Oberle et al., 1991; Sutcliffe et al., 1992; Kumari and Usdin, 2010). The role for heterochromatin in stabilizing disease-expanding STRs and the downstream consequences in disease is an exciting area for future inquiry, with crosscutting impact across multiple repeat expansion disorders already linked to DNA methylation and H3K9me3 (reviewed in Dion and Wilson [2009]). Finally, VNTRs, also known as minisatellites, are distinguished from STRs as their repeating monomer units are greater than six bps in length (Course et al., 2021). Although more than 55,000 VNTRs are present in the human genome, relatively little is known regarding their mechanisms of heterochromatinization and variation across patient cohorts. Limited knowledge of STRs is largely a consequence of their greater size relative to STRs, which has prevented their accurate mapping to human reference genomes and repeat length quantification due to limitations associated with short-read sequencing. The recent advent of long-read sequencing may address these limitations, as evidenced by the identification of VNTRs in the long-read generated T2T CHM13 genome (Hoyt et al., 2022). Long-read sequencing has recently shown promise in identifying disease-associated VNTRs (daVNTRs), such as the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-associated WDR7 daVNTR (Course et al., 2020). A hexanucleotide STR tract facilitates the association between heterochromatin effectors and shelterin to maintain telomere length Human telomeres contain an internal hexanucleotide 50 -TTA GGG-30 STR tract that recruits the protein complex shelterin as a critical mechanism supporting telomere stability (de Lange, 2018). Telomeres are exceptionally unstable as their unprotected ends can stimulate DNA damage repair pathways and undergo progressive shortening with each cell division in noncancerous, somatic cells (Shay and Wright, 2019). To protect telomere ends from initiating DNA damage response pathways, shelterin facilitates telomere loop (t-loop) formation in which the single-stranded 30 DNA overhang at telomere ends invades the double-stranded telomere DNA to create a protective loop structure (de Lange, 2018). Shelterin also recruits telomerase in germline and embryonic tissues to maintain telomere length (Hockemeyer and Collins, 2015). Together, these studies highlight the

[Page 10]

functional role for telomere hexanucleotide STR tracts in promoting telomere stability via the recruitment of the shelterin protein complex. Telomeres and heterochromatin were first linked upon discovery of the telomere position effect (TPE), a phenomenon conserved from yeast to humans where reporter genes incorporated near telomeres become silenced due to the spread of nearby heterochromatin (Blasco, 2007). Follow-up studies have begun deciphering the specific mechanisms supporting heterochromatin acquisition, maintenance, and function at telomeres. For example, in cells derived from a Suv39h1 and Suv39h2 double-knockout mouse, telomeres are depleted for H3K9me2/3 and HP1 isoforms concomitant with aberrant telomere lengthening (Garcı́a-Cao et al., 2004). Additionally, the long ncRNA termed ‘‘telomeric repeat-containing RNA’’ (TERRA) has been reported to promote telomere heterochromatinization by recruiting HP1a to shelterin in human colorectal cancer HCT116 cells (Figure 4D) (Deng et al., 2009). TERRA depletion leads to an increase in telomere-free ends, telomere doublets, and chromatid duplications, thus supporting a role for telomere heterochromatinization in promoting telomere stability (Deng et al., 2009). It is important to acknowledge that these studies, while exciting and thought provoking, still represent an area of active investigation and conflicting observations have been reported (Barral and Déjardin, 2020). Future research into the interplay between telomeric heterochromatinization, transcription, and stability are needed to dissect the TERRA-dependent and -independent mechanisms of heterochromatinization of telomeres. Long terminal repeat retrotransposons: SETDB1dependent H3K9 methylation is essential for silencing of ERVs One of three major subclasses of class I TEs (termed ‘‘RTEs’’) are the long terminal repeat (LTR) ERVs comprising 8–9% of the human genome (Hoyt et al., 2022). ERVs were originally integrated into the germline via an exogenous provirus infection, after which they utilized a virus-like mechanism leveraging self-encoded Gag, Pol, and Env proteins driven by an internal LTR Pol II promoter to infect a new host (Chuong et al., 2017). This once primary role of ERVs has been lost due in part to Env truncations. Of the thirty or more ERV subfamilies known to be present within the human genome (HERVs), none are thought to contain all the necessary components to support their mobilization (Goodier, 2016). ERVs are targeted by distinct molecular machinery to facilitate their heterochromatinization and repression. In early embryonic development, when global DNA demethylation promotes a transient burst in ERV expression (Fu et al., 2019; Reik and Surani, 2015), ERV silencing is primarily mediated by Krüppel-associated box-domain-containing-zinc-finger proteins (KRAB-ZFPs). Mammalian KRAB-ZFPs bind to motifs internal to the ERV DNA sequence via their C2H2 zinc fingers (Figure 4E) (Geis and Goff, 2020). The KRAB domain facilitates direct interactions with KRAB-associated protein 1 (KAP1/TRIM28), which in turn recruits heterochromatin effectors including HP1a and the H3K9 HMT SETDB1 (Geis and Goff, 2020; Schultz et al., 2002)(Figure 4E). Thus, ERVs appear to be targeted by

SETDB1 rather than SUV39H1 or SUV39H2 as the predominant HMT mediating its heterochromatinization. The necessity for SETDB1-mediated ERV repression has been illustrated using primordial germ cells from Setdb1 conditional knockout mice. In this model system, primordial germ cells exhibit an ectopic increase in ERV expression as well as severe postnatal defects, suggesting that SETDB1-mediated ERV silencing is critical for proper germ cell development (Liu et al., 2014). The requirement of SETDB1-mediated KRAB-ZFP silencing of ERVs has also been demonstrated in somatic mouse cells and tissues, supporting a pervasive role for SETDB1dependent heterochromatin in maintaining ERV repression beyond development (Ecco et al., 2016). Non-LTR retrotransposons: DNA methylation and H3K9me3 cooperate to repress LINE-1 expression in early development Non-LTR RTEs are the most prevalent repetitive DNA sequences present within the human genome (Hoyt et al., 2022) and primarily include LINEs and SINEs (Figure 3). Within the autonomous LINE subdivision of RTEs, only LINE-1s have retained their genomic mobility, with 100 active LINE-1s thought to currently reside in an individual human’s genome (Brouha et al., 2003). LINE-1 retrotransposition is facilitated by an internal 50 UTR Pol II promoter that transcribes two open reading frames (i.e., ORF1 and ORF2) ending with a 30 UTR polyadenylation signal. ORF1 encodes a protein possessing RNA binding and nucleic acid chaperone abilities while ORF2 encodes a protein with endonuclease and reverse transcriptase properties that are fundamental to the RTE copy-and-paste mechanism (Beck et al., 2011). Roughly 100 cases of sporadic human disease have been attributed to LINE-1 or SINE retrotransposition into gene bodies (Hancks and Kazazian, 2016). LINE-1 exon insertions, such as those first detected in two hemophilia A patients as early as 1988 (Kazazian et al., 1988), represent the most direct mechanism for disrupting protein function by altering the coding sequence of the target gene. Intron integration of non-LTR RTEs can also contribute to human disease by altering RNA splicing (Burns and Boeke, 2012; Payer et al., 2019), highlighting the diverse mechanisms by which gene body retrotransposition events can impair a downstream protein’s function. LINE-1 elements are expressed shortly after human embryo fertilization and then are silenced by the 16-cell stage or after. Recent reports have linked LINE-1 expression to the establishment of chromatin accessibility during early embryogenesis (Guo et al., 2014; Jachowicz et al., 2017). LINE-1 expression coincides, but does not directly overlap, with the wave of global DNA demethylation which occurs in pre-implantation embryos (Seisenberger et al., 2012), suggesting that DNA methylation is a critical regulator of LINE-1 expression during early development. H3K9me3-mediated silencing is also crucial in the repression of LINE-1s, as gain of H3K9me3 occurs during the 16-cell stage in early embryogenesis in parallel with gained DNA methylation (Wang et al., 2018a). Together these studies suggest that both H3K9me3 and DNA methylation regulate the silencing and heterochromatinization of LINE-1 expression.

[Page 11]

The mechanisms governing LINE-1 heterochromatinization in mammalian systems are an active area of investigation. SETDB1 facilitates H3K9me2/3 deposition in both early development and in somatic cells in LINE-1 elements via its association with the human silencing hub (HUSH) complex (Figure 4F) (Tchasovnikarova et al., 2015; Tunbak et al., 2020). The HUSH complex localizes to intronless DNA, a characteristic feature of evolutionarily young LINE-1s, where it interacts with actively transcribed LINE-1 RNA to promote H3K9me3 deposition (Figure 4F) (Seczynska et al., 2022). HUSH produces prematurely terminated transcripts which may then be locally degraded via the nuclear exosome targeting (NEXT) complex (Figure 4F) (Garland et al., 2022). Together, these studies highlight that DNA methylation as well as RNA-mediated deposition of H3K9me3 via the HUSH complex can silence LINE-1 elements in mammalian development and somatic cells. Non-LTR retrotransposons: SUV39H1 represses SINE transcription via local H3K9me3 By contrast to LINEs, SINE RTEs are not known to encode for proteins and thus rely on LINE-1 encoded proteins to facilitate their non-autonomous retrotransposition. In total, there are 850k full-length SINEs across three primary lineages (i.e., AluJ, AluS, and AluY) within the human genome. Although all full-length AluJ elements (i.e., 160k) are believed to be nonfunctional, a significant portion of full-length AluS (i.e., 550k) and nearly all full-length AluY (i.e., 130k) elements are suggested to have retained their retrotransposition abilities based on in vitro mobilization assays (Bennett et al., 2008). Thus, along with LINE-1s, SINEs maintain a significant threat to genome instability. SINE DNA is enriched for 5mC DNA methylation (Arand et al., 2012). However, multiple studies argue against DNA methylation as sufficient to repress SINE expression. Both 5-Azacytidine, a DNMT small-molecule inhibitor, and DNMT1 repression are unable to induce SINE transcriptional activation (Varshney et al., 2015). The heterochromatin effectors HP1a and SUV39H1 as well as H3K9me3 are enriched at SINEs even in the absence of DNA methylation (Varshney et al., 2015). Small molecule inhibition of SUV39H1 results in significant decreases in H3K9me3 abundance, along with increased RNA polymerase III occupancy leading to elevated SINE transcription (Varshney et al., 2015). These data suggest that SUV39H1-mediated H3K9me3 can at least in part govern SINE transcription repression (Figure 4G). INTERPLAY AMONG 3D GENOME FOLDING, HETEROCHROMATIN, AND REPETITIVE DNA ELEMENTS While the literature provides support for a link between heterochromatin and higher-order chromatin organization, and a role for heterochromatin in silencing the repetitive genome, the higher-order folding principles of the repetitive genome have only recently begun to be explored. We highlight some early case studies exploring the relationship among heterochromatin, higher-order chromatin folding patterns, and the repetitive genome.

Spatial positioning of genomic loci with double strand breaks outside of chromocenters promotes high-fidelity repair of pericentromeric repeats in mice A notable example for how the higher-order folding of heterochromatin interplays with the repetitive genome comes from studies exploring the activation of DNA repair pathways within clustered pericentromeric repeats. The high concentration of repetitive satellite DNA sequences in pericentromeric chromatin pose a significant challenge for double strand break (DSB) repair by homologous recombination (HR). Although HR is typically an exceptionally high-fidelity DSB repair pathway (Verma and Greenberg, 2021), the presence of repetitive sequences increases the possibility for improper recombination in cis (i.e., between similar satellites present at distinct genomic loci on homologous chromosomes) or in trans (i.e., between similar satellites present on non-homologous chromosomes). In mouse model systems, the heterochromatinization and condensation of pericentromeric satellite repeat clusters into chromocenters can establish a barrier to prevent improper access of HR machinery (Mitrentsi et al., 2022). It has been suggested that this mechanism likely works cooperatively with the relocation of pericentromeric DSBs towards the periphery to improve the fidelity of HR DSB repair (Caridi et al., 2018; Chiolo et al., 2011; Tsouroula et al., 2016). Notably, in NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblasts, enrichment of H3K9me3 at CRISPR-induced pericentromeric DSBs remains unchanged following its relocation to the periphery, which may provide continued additional protection against nonspecific HR (Tsouroula et al., 2016). It is interesting that these mechanisms have been shown to be absent in human cell model systems (Mitrentsi et al., 2022), which is somewhat unexpected given the conservation of spatial mechanisms governing pericentromeric DSB repair from yeast to mice. Therefore, future investigations into how both spatial genome organization and heterochromatinization influence the fidelity of pericentromeric DSB repair in humans will be critical for addressing this intriguing discrepancy. STR expansion disrupts TAD boundaries in fragile X syndrome Although repeat expansion disorders share the commonality of unstable STR expansion, the repeat tracts themselves are quite diverse in their specific properties across diseases. For example, the repeat unit sequence, as well as the repeat unit length, can be highly variable. Each disorder has a different premutation and mutation threshold, and the tracts are evenly distributed across the genome in exons and introns and the 50 UTR, 30 UTR, and intergenic regions. We recently set out to ascertain if chromatin folding patterns could shed light on why some regions of the genome grow unstable in disease, whereas hundreds of thousands of sequence- and transcription-matched STR tracts remain stable. Using Hi-C maps across multiple cell types, Sun et al. reported that nearly all STRs which are known to grow unstable in disease co-localize with the boundaries of TADs/subTADs (Sun et al., 2018) (Figure 5A). On the basis of this observation, it was hypothesized that a subset of genetically encoded boundaries would serve as hotspots in the human genome for vulnerability to instability events. Using fibroblasts, B cells, and post-mortem

[Page 12]

Figure 5. STR expansion and HERV-H transcription influence TAD boundary integrity

(A) A CGG trinucleotide short tandem repeat (STR) tract residing in the 50 UTR of FMR1 is associated with fragile X syndrome. (B) A study by (Sun et al., 2018) reports that in healthy individuals, the CGG STR (i.e., 6–40 repeating monomer subunits) is present at a TAD boundary, where FMR1 is actively transcribed. (C) As the CGG STR expands to full mutation length of 200 triplets or more, CTCF is displaced and local TAD/subTAD boundaries within 1 Mb around FMR1 are disrupted. (D) A study by Zhang et al. (2019) shows that transcription of HERV-H by the RNA Polymerase II complex presents a physical barrier that interferes with cohesinmediated loop extrusion, leading to the creation of a local CTCF-independent TAD boundary. (E) De novo HERV-H insertion is sufficient for the formation of a new TAD boundary. (F) Transcriptional repression of an endogenous HERV-H locus can dissolve a pre-existing TAD boundary.

brain tissue from male FXS patients compared to healthy normal-length individuals, Sun et al. observed severe boundary disruption around the FMR1 gene upon long mutation-length CGG expansion (Sun et al., 2018) (Figures 5B and 5C). Transcriptional silencing of FMR1 correlated with severe boundary disruption, suggesting a link between structural boundary integrity and proper gene expression. Together, these data suggest that STR instability events may be linked to the molecular and structural features at a subset of TAD boundaries. Although mutation-length STR expansion events coincide with boundary disruption, it is not yet known whether instability

drives genome misfolding or vice versa. A recent BioRxiv preprint reports the deposition of Megabase-scale H3K9me3 domains along with widespread genome misfolding and trans interactions between autosomes and the X chromosome in FXS (Zhou et al., 2021), suggesting an interplay between H3K9me3, genome folding, and repeat instability. Transcription of HERV-H is sufficient to create a TAD/ subTAD boundary Transcriptionally active RTEs can actively shape chromatin architecture and genome function independent of whether they

[Page 13]

mobilize or destroy architectural protein motifs (Zhang et al., 2019). Human ES cells are hypomethylated with respect to differentiated cell lines, which can lead to the de-repression of LTR and non-LTR RTEs. In human embryonic stem cells, the RTE HERV-H (Figure 5D) is transcribed, and its transcripts account for 2% of the total poly A RNA pool (Santoni et al., 2012). Random integration of an active HERV-H element into a new genomic locus is sufficient to form a de novo TAD boundary in a transcription-dependent manner (Figure 5E). Moreover, repression of HERV-H expression via differentiation of human ES cells to cardiomyocytes or dCas9-KRAB mediated silencing attenuates the ability of the HERV-H sequence to serve as a boundary element (Figure 5F). In the development of the mouse 2 cell stage embryo, transcription of murine endogenous retrovirus element (MERV) family elements is also sufficient to form TAD boundaries (Kruse et al., 2019). Together, these studies highlight that specific subclasses of ERV repeat elements can form TAD/subTAD boundaries in a transcription-dependent manner. SINEs and LINEs may shape human genome folding via redistribution CTCF binding sites Finally, it has been hypothesized that SINEs and LINEs shape the higher-order folding of the genome by harboring binding sites for the architectural protein CTCF within their own sequences (Choudhary et al., 2022; Diehl et al., 2020). Activation of retroelements during evolution can lead to species-specific expansion of CTCF binding sites. Over 95% of mammalian CTCF sites are derived from SINEs, LINEs, and LTRs (Choudhary et al., 2020)., and SINEs in mice are enriched for CTCFbound motifs (Schmidt et al., 2012). It is possible that the mobilization of SINE sequences during evolution could provide significant alterations to genome folding patterns in a CTCFdependent manner. To minimize this risk, the CTCF motifs in SINEs are targeted by the ChAHP complex, which competes with CTCF for motif binding to prevent novel SINE B2 integrations from disrupting the 3D genome (Kaaij et al., 2019). Additionally, SETDB1 facilitates the heterochromatinization of SINE B2s in mouse macrophages, thus preserving the regulation of lipopolysaccharide-inducible genes by preventing inappropriate CTCF binding and ectopic chromatin looping events (Gualdrini et al., 2022). Comparatively, in human lymphoblastoid cells, only a small fraction of CTCF-bound loop anchors are present in SINE elements, as LTR RTEs contained the greatest percentage of CTCF-bound loop anchors (Choudhary et al., 2020). Thus, CTCF binding sites in RTEs can form loops and mechanistically contribute to the formation of TAD boundaries. CONCLUSIONS Contrasting mechanisms of compartmentalization and loop extrusion shape the higher-order folding of eukaryotic genomes in ways that directly influence heterochromatin acquisition and maintenance. While the heterochromatic mechanisms associated with repetitive DNA element biology have been well studied in the context of the linear chromatin fiber, emerging evidence reveals critical crosstalk between higher-order folding patterns

and heterochromatin acquisition. Looking ahead, technological innovations including high-resolution microscopy, spatial genomics, single-cell technologies, and systematic perturbative studies will be well positioned to catalyze a wave of fresh insights into how the genome’s structure-function relationship intricately governs stability of the repetitive genome across space and time in development and human disease. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We regret that many important works of our colleagues are not cited due to the large scope of the topic and journal space limits. S.A.H. is a New York Stem Cell Foundation – Druckenmiller Fellow. This research was supported by the New York Stem Cell Foundation (to S.A.H.); NIH National Institute of Mental Health (1R01MH120269; 1DP1MH129957) (to J.E.P.-C.); NIH National Institute of Neural Disorders and Stroke (1R01-NS114226) (to J.E.P.-C.); 4D Nucleome Common Fund grants (1U01DK127405, 1U01DA052715) (to J.E.P.-C.); NSF CAREER Award (CBE-1943945) (to J.E.P.-C.); and Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Neurodegenerative Disease Pairs Award (2020-221479-5022) (to J.E.P.-C.). DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests. REFERENCES Achour, M., Jacq, X., Rondé, P., Alhosin, M., Charlot, C., Chataigneau, T., Jeanblanc, M., Macaluso, M., Giordano, A., Hughes, A.D., et al. (2008). The interaction of the SRA domain of ICBP90 with a novel domain of DNMT1 is involved in the regulation of VEGF gene expression. Oncogene 27, 2187– 2197. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1210855. Allshire, R.C., Nimmo, E.R., Ekwall, K., Javerzat, J.P., and Cranston, G. (1995). Mutations derepressing silent centromeric domains in fission yeast disrupt chromosome segregation. Genes Dev. 9, 218–233. https://doi.org/10.1101/ gad.9.2.218. Amendola, M., and van Steensel, B. (2015). Nuclear lamins are not required for lamina-associated domain organization in mouse embryonic stem cells. EMBO Rep. 16, 610–617. https://doi.org/10.15252/embr.201439789. Arand, J., Spieler, D., Karius, T., Branco, M.R., Meilinger, D., Meissner, A., Jenuwein, T., Xu, G., Leonhardt, H., Wolf, V., and Walter, J. (2012). In vivo control of CpG and non-CpG DNA methylation by DNA methyltransferases. PLoS Genet. 8, e1002750. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002750. Babbio, F., Pistore, C., Curti, L., Castiglioni, I., Kunderfranco, P., Brino, L., Oudet, P., Seiler, R., Thalman, G.N., Roggero, E., et al. (2012). The SRA protein UHRF1 promotes epigenetic crosstalks and is involved in prostate cancer progression. Oncogene 31, 4878–4887. https://doi.org/10.1038/onc.2011.641. Banigan, E.J., and Mirny, L.A. (2020). Loop extrusion: theory meets singlemolecule experiments. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol 64, 124–138. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.ceb.2020.04.011. Bannister, A.J., Zegerman, P., Partridge, J.F., Miska, E.A., Thomas, J.O., Allshire, R.C., and Kouzarides, T. (2001). Selective recognition of methylated lysine 9 on histone H3 by the HP1 chromo domain. Nature 410, 120–124. https://doi.org/10.1038/35065138. Barr, M.L., and Bertram, E.G. (1949). A morphological distinction between neurones of the male and female, and the behaviour of the nucleolar satellite during accelerated nucleoprotein synthesis. Nature 163, 676–677. https:// doi.org/10.1038/163676a0. Barral, A., and Déjardin, J. (2020). Telomeric Chromatin and TERRA. J Mol Biol 432, 4244–4256. Beagan, J.A., Duong, M.T., Titus, K.R., Zhou, L., Cao, Z., Ma, J., Lachanski, C.V., Gillis, D.R., and Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2017). YY1 and CTCF orchestrate a 3D chromatin looping switch during early neural lineage commitment. Genome Res. 27, 1139–1152. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.215160.116.

[Page 14]

Beagan, J.A., Gilgenast, T., Kim, J., Plona, Z., Norton, H., Hu, G., Hsu, S., Shields, E., Lyu, X., Apostolou, E., et al. (2016). Local genome topology can exhibit an incompletely rewired 3D-folding state during somatic cell reprogramming. Cell Stem Cell 18, 611–624. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2016. 04.004. Beagan, J.A., Pastuzyn, E.D., Fernandez, L.R., Guo, M.H., Feng, K., Titus, K.R., Chandrashekar, H., Shepherd, J.D., and Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2020). Three-dimensional genome restructuring across timescales of activityinduced neuronal gene expression. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 707–717. https://doi. org/10.1038/s41593-020-0634-6. Beagan, J.A., and Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2020). On the existence and functionality of topologically associating domains. Nat. Genet. 52, 8–16. https://doi. org/10.1038/s41588-019-0561-1. Beck, C.R., Garcia-Perez, J.L., Badge, R.M., and Moran, J.V. (2011). LINE-1 elements in structural variation and disease. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 12, 187–215. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genom-082509-14 1802. Becker, J.S., McCarthy, R.L., Sidoli, S., Donahue, G., Kaeding, K.E., He, Z., Lin, S., Garcia, B.A., and Zaret, K.S. (2017). Genomic and proteomic resolution of heterochromatin and its restriction of alternate fate genes. Mol. Cell 68, 1023–1037.e15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.11.030. Becker, J.S., Nicetto, D., and Zaret, K.S. (2016). H3K9me3-Dependent heterochromatin: barrier to cell fate changes. Trends Genet. 32, 29–41. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.tig.2015.11.001.

Chiolo, I., Minoda, A., Colmenares, S., Polyzos, A., Costes, S., and Karpen, G. (2011). Double-strand breaks in heterochromatin move outside of a dynamic HP1a domain to complete recombinational repair. Cell 144, 732–744. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.02.012. Choudhary, M.N., Friedman, R.Z., Wang, J.T., Jang, H.S., Zhuo, X., and Wang, T. (2020). Co-opted transposons help perpetuate conserved higher-order chromosomal structures. Genome Biol. 21, 16. https://doi.org/10.1186/ s13059-019-1916-8. Choudhary, M.N., Quaid, K., Xing, X., Schmidt, H., and Wang, T. (2022). Widespread contribution of transposable elements to the rewiring of mammalian 3D genomes and gene regulation. Preprint at bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/ 2022.02.01.475239. Chuong, E.B., Elde, N.C., and Feschotte, C. (2017). Regulatory activities of transposable elements: from conflicts to benefits. Nat. Rev. Genet. 18, 71– 86. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg.2016.139. Course, M.M., Gudsnuk, K., Smukowski, S.N., Winston, K., Desai, N., Ross, J.P., Sulovari, A., Bourassa, C.V., Spiegelman, D., Couthouis, J., et al. (2020). Evolution of a human-specific tandem repeat associated with ALS. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 107, 445–460. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.07.004. Course, M.M., Sulovari, A., Gudsnuk, K., Eichler, E.E., and Valdmanis, P.N. (2021). Characterizing nucleotide variation and expansion dynamics in human-specific variable number tandem repeats. Genome Res. 31, 1313– 1324. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.275560.121.

Bennett, E.A., Keller, H., Mills, R.E., Schmidt, S., Moran, J.V., Weichenrieder, O., and Devine, S.E. (2008). Active Alu retrotransposons in the human genome. Genome Res. 18, 1875–1883. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.081737.108.

Davidson, I.F., Goetz, D., Zaczek, M.P., Molodtsov, M.I., Huis in ’t Veld, P.J., Weissmann, F., Litos, G., Cisneros, D.A., Ocampo-Hafalla, M., Ladurner, R., et al. (2016). Rapid movement and transcriptional re-localization of human cohesin on DNA. Embo J. 35, 2671–2685.

Bersaglieri, C., Kresoja-Rakic, J., Gupta, S., Bär, D., Kuzyakiv, R., Panatta, M., and Santoro, R. (2022). Genome-wide maps of nucleolus interactions reveal distinct layers of repressive chromatin domains. Nat. Commun. 13, 1483. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-29146-2.

Davidson, I.F., and Peters, J.M. (2021). Genome folding through loop extrusion by SMC complexes. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 22, 445–464. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41580-021-00349-7.

Bian, Q., Anderson, E.C., Yang, Q., and Meyer, B.J. (2020). Histone H3K9 methylation promotes formation of genome compartments in Caenorhabditis elegans via chromosome compaction and perinuclear anchoring. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 11459–11470. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2002 068117. Bian, Q., Khanna, N., Alvikas, J., and Belmont, A.S. (2013). b-Globin cis-elements determine differential nuclear targeting through epigenetic modifications. J. Cell Biol 203, 767–783. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201305027. Bintu, B., Mateo, L.J., Su, J.H., Sinnott-Armstrong, N.A., Parker, M., Kinrot, S., Yamaya, K., Boettiger, A.N., and Zhuang, X. (2018). Super-resolution chromatin tracing reveals domains and cooperative interactions in single cells. Science 362, eaau1783. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau1783. Blackburn, E.H., and Gall, J.G. (1978). A tandemly repeated sequence at the termini of the extrachromosomal ribosomal RNA genes in Tetrahymena. J. Mol. Biol. 120, 33–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(78)90294-2. Blasco, M.A. (2007). The epigenetic regulation of mammalian telomeres. Nat. Rev. Genet. 8, 299–309. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2047. Brouha, B., Schustak, J., Badge, R.M., Lutz-Prigge, S., Farley, A.H., Moran, J.V., and Kazazian, H.H., Jr. (2003). Hot L1s account for the bulk of retrotransposition in the human population. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 5280–5285. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0831042100. Burns, K., and Boeke, J. (2012). Human transposon tectonics. Cell 149, 740– 752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.04.019. Caridi, C.P., D’Agostino, C., Ryu, T., Zapotoczny, G., Delabaere, L., Li, X., Khodaverdian, V.Y., Amaral, N., Lin, E., Rau, A.R., and Chiolo, I. (2018). Nuclear F-actin and myosins drive relocalization of heterochromatic breaks. Nature 559, 54–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0242-8. Chen, Y., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, L., Brinkman, E.K., Adam, S.A., Goldman, R., van Steensel, B., Ma, J., and Belmont, A.S. (2018). Mapping 3D genome organization relative to nuclear compartments using TSA-Seq as a cytological ruler. J. Cell Biol 217, 4025–4048. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb. 201807108.

de Lange, T. (2018). Shelterin-mediated telomere protection. Annu. Rev. Genet. 52, 223–247. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet-032918-021921. Deng, Z., Norseen, J., Wiedmer, A., Riethman, H., and Lieberman, P.M. (2009). TERRA RNA binding to TRF2 facilitates heterochromatin formation and ORC recruitment at telomeres. Mol. Cell 35, 403–413. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2009.06.025. Diehl, A.G., Ouyang, N., and Boyle, A.P. (2020). Transposable elements contribute to cell and species-specific chromatin looping and gene regulation in mammalian genomes. Nat. Commun. 11, 1796. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41467-020-15520-5. Dion, V., and Wilson, J.H. (2009). Instability and chromatin structure of expanded trinucleotide repeats. Trends Genet. 25, 288–297. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.tig.2009.04.007. Dixon, J.R., Selvaraj, S., Yue, F., Kim, A., Li, Y., Shen, Y., Hu, M., Liu, J.S., and Ren, B. (2012). Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of chromatin interactions. Nature 485, 376–380. https://doi.org/10. 1038/nature11082. Ecco, G., Cassano, M., Kauzlaric, A., Duc, J., Coluccio, A., Offner, S., Imbeault, M., Rowe, H., Turelli, P., and Trono, D. (2016). Transposable elements and their KRAB-ZFP Controllers regulate gene expression in adult tissues. Dev. Cell 36, 611–623. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2016.02.024. Elgin, S.C.R., and Reuter, G. (2013). Position-effect variegation, heterochromatin formation, and gene silencing in Drosophila. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 5, a017780. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a017780. Ellegren, H. (2000). Heterogeneous mutation processes in human microsatellite DNA sequences. Nat Genet 24, 400–402. Emerson, D.J., Zhao, P.A., Cook, A.L., Barnett, R.J., Klein, K.N., Saulebekova, D., Ge, C., Zhou, L., Simandi, Z., Minsk, M.K., et al. (2022). Cohesin-mediated loop anchors confine the locations of human replication origins. Nature 606, 812–819. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04803-0. Fang, J., Cheng, J., Wang, J., Zhang, Q., Liu, M., Gong, R., Wang, P., Zhang, X., Feng, Y., Lan, W., et al. (2016). Hemi-methylated DNA opens a closed

[Page 15]

conformation of UHRF1 to facilitate its histone recognition. Nat. Commun. 7, 11197. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11197. Finlan, L.E., Sproul, D., Thomson, I., Boyle, S., Kerr, E., Perry, P., Ylstra, B., Chubb, J.R., and Bickmore, W.A. (2008). Recruitment to the nuclear periphery can alter expression of genes in human cells. PLoS Genet. 4, e1000039. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000039. Firestein, R., Cui, X., Huie, P., and Cleary, M.L. (2000). Set domain-dependent regulation of transcriptional silencing and growth control by SUV39H1, a mammalian ortholog of Drosophila Su(var)3-9. Mol. Cell Biol 20, 4900–4909. https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.20.13.4900-4909.2000. Frottin, F., Schueder, F., Tiwary, S., Gupta, R., Körner, R., Schlichthaerle, T., Cox, J., Jungmann, R., Hartl, F.U., and Hipp, M.S. (2019). The nucleolus functions as a phase-separated protein quality control compartment. Science 365, 342–347. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw9157. Fu, B., Ma, H., and Liu, D. (2019). Endogenous retroviruses function as gene expression regulatory elements during mammalian pre-implantation embryo development. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20, 790. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20030790. Fudenberg, G., Imakaev, M., Lu, C., Goloborodko, A., Abdennur, N., and Mirny, L. (2016). formation of chromosomal domains by loop extrusion. Cell Rep. 15, 2038–2049. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.04.085. Garcı́a-Cao, M., O’Sullivan, R., Peters, A.H.F.M., Jenuwein, T., and Blasco, M.A. (2004). Epigenetic regulation of telomere length in mammalian cells by the Suv39h1 and Suv39h2 histone methyltransferases. Nat. Genet. 36, 94– 99. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1278. Garland, W., Müller, I., Wu, M., Schmid, M., Imamura, K., Rib, L., Sandelin, A., Helin, K., and Jensen, T.H. (2022). Chromatin modifier HUSH co-operates with RNA decay factor NEXT to restrict transposable element expression. Mol. Cell 82, 1691–1707.e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2022.03.004. Geis, F.K., and Goff, S.P. (2020). Silencing and transcriptional regulation of endogenous retroviruses: an overview. Viruses 12, 884. https://doi.org/10. 3390/v12080884. Goodier, J.L. (2016). Restricting retrotransposons: a review. Mob. DNA 7, 16. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13100-016-0070-z. Gualdrini, F., Polletti, S., Simonatto, M., Prosperini, E., Pileri, F., and Natoli, G. (2022). H3K9 trimethylation in active chromatin restricts the usage of functional CTCF sites in SINE B2 repeats. Genes Dev. 36, 414–432. https://doi.org/10. 1101/gad.349282.121. Guelen, L., Pagie, L., Brasset, E., Meuleman, W., Faza, M.B., Talhout, W., Eussen, B.H., de Klein, A., Wessels, L., de Laat, W., and van Steensel, B. (2008). Domain organization of human chromosomes revealed by mapping of nuclear lamina interactions. Nature 453, 948–951. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature 06947. Guo, H., Zhu, P., Yan, L., Li, R., Hu, B., Lian, Y., Yan, J., Ren, X., Lin, S., Li, J., et al. (2014). The DNA methylation landscape of human early embryos. Nature 511, 606–610. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13544. Gymrek, M., Willems, T., Guilmatre, A., Zeng, H., Markus, B., Georgiev, S., Daly, M.J., Price, A.L., Pritchard, J.K., Sharp, A.J., and Erlich, Y. (2016). Abundant contribution of short tandem repeats to gene expression variation in humans. Nat. Genet. 48, 22–29. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3461. Haarhuis, J.H.I., van der Weide, R.H., Blomen, V.A., Flach, K.D., Teunissen, H., Willems, L., Brummelkamp, T.R., Rowland, B.D., and de Wit, E. (2022). A Mediator-cohesin axis controls heterochromatin domain formation. Nat. Commun. 13, 754. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-28377-7. Haarhuis, J.H., van der Weide, R.H., Blomen, V.A., Yáñez-Cuna, J.O., Amendola, M., van Ruiten, M.S., Krijger, P.H., Teunissen, H., Medema, R.H., van Steensel, B., et al. (2017). The cohesin Release factor WAPL restricts chromatin loop extension. Cell 169, 693–707.e14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 2017.04.013. Hancks, D.C., and Kazazian, H.H., Jr. (2016). Roles for retrotransposon insertions in human disease. Mob. DNA 7, 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13100-0160065-9. Hannan, A.J. (2018). Tandem repeats mediating genetic plasticity in health and disease. Nat. Rev. Genet. 19, 286–298. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg.2017.115.

Harr, J.C., Luperchio, T.R., Wong, X., Cohen, E., Wheelan, S.J., and Reddy, K.L. (2015). Directed targeting of chromatin to the nuclear lamina is mediated by chromatin state and A-type lamins. J. Cell Biol. 208, 33–52. https://doi.org/ 10.1083/jcb.201405110. Heitz, E. (1928). Das Heterochromatin der Moose (Bornträger). Hermant, C., and Torres-Padilla, M.E. (2021). TFs for TEs: the transcription factor repertoire of mammalian transposable elements. Genes Dev. 35, 22–39. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.344473.120. Hockemeyer, D., and Collins, K. (2015). Control of telomerase action at human telomeres. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 22, 848–852. https://doi.org/10.1038/ nsmb.3083. Holla, S., Dhakshnamoorthy, J., Folco, H.D., Balachandran, V., Xiao, H., Sun, L.L., Wheeler, D., Zofall, M., and Grewal, S.I. (2020). Positioning heterochromatin at the nuclear periphery Suppresses histone Turnover to promote epigenetic inheritance. Cell 180, 150–164.e15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019. 12.004. Hoyt, S.J., Storer, J.M., Hartley, G.A., Grady, P.G.S., Gershman, A., de Lima, L.G., Limouse, C., Halabian, R., Wojenski, L., Rodriguez, M., et al. (2022). From telomere to telomere: the transcriptional and epigenetic state of human repeat elements. Science 376, eabk3112. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abk3112. Ishiyama, S., Nishiyama, A., Saeki, Y., Moritsugu, K., Morimoto, D., Yamaguchi, L., Arai, N., Matsumura, R., Kawakami, T., Mishima, Y., et al. (2017). Structure of the Dnmt1 reader module complexed with a unique two-mono-ubiquitin mark on histone H3 reveals the basis for DNA methylation maintenance. Mol. Cell 68, 350–360.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.09.037. , A., Rando, O.J., and TorresJachowicz, J.W., Bing, X., Pontabry, J., Boskovic Padilla, M.E. (2017). LINE-1 activation after fertilization regulates global chromatin accessibility in the early mouse embryo. Nat. Genet. 49, 1502–1510. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3945. Johnson, W.L., Yewdell, W.T., Bell, J.C., McNulty, S.M., Duda, Z., O’Neill, R.J., Sullivan, B.A., and Straight, A.F. (2017). RNA-dependent stabilization of SUV39H1 at constitutive heterochromatin. Elife 6, e25299. https://doi.org/ 10.7554/elife.25299. Kaaij, L.J., Mohn, F., van der Weide, R.H., de Wit, E., and Bühler, M. (2019). The ChAHP complex counteracts chromatin looping at CTCF sites that emerged from SINE expansions in mouse. Cell 178, 1437–1451.e14. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.cell.2019.08.007. Kazazian, H.H., Jr., Wong, C., Youssoufian, H., Scott, A.F., Phillips, D.G., and Antonarakis, S.E. (1988). Haemophilia A resulting from de novo insertion of L1 sequences represents a novel mechanism for mutation in man. Nature 332, 164–166. https://doi.org/10.1038/332164a0. Kim, J.H., Rege, M., Valeri, J., Dunagin, M.C., Metzger, A., Titus, K.R., Gilgenast, T.G., Gong, W., Beagan, J.A., Raj, A., and Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2019). LADL: light-activated dynamic looping for endogenous gene expression control. Nat. Methods 16, 633–639. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0436-5. Kit, S. (1961). Equilibrium sedimentation in density gradients of DNA preparations from animal tissues. J. Mol. Biol. 3, 711–IN2. https://doi.org/10.1016/ s0022-2836(61)80075-2. Kooistra, S.M., and Helin, K. (2012). Molecular mechanisms and potential functions of histone demethylases. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 13, 297–311. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3327. Kruse, K., Dı́az, N., Enriquez-Gasca, R., Gaume, X., Torres-Padilla, M.-E., and Vaquerizas, J.M. (2019). Transposable elements drive reorganisation of 3D chromatin during early embryogenesis. Preprint at bioRxiv523712. https:// doi.org/10.1101/523712. Kumari, D., and Usdin, K. (2010). The distribution of repressive histone modifications on silenced FMR1 alleles provides clues to the mechanism of gene silencing in fragile X syndrome. Hum Mol Genet 19, 4634–4642. La Spada, A.R., Wilson, E.M., Lubahn, D.B., Harding, A.E., and Fischbeck, K.H. (1991). Androgen receptor gene mutations in X-linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy. Nature 352, 77–79. https://doi.org/10.1038/352077a0.

[Page 16]

Lachner, M., O’Carroll, D., Rea, S., Mechtler, K., and Jenuwein, T. (2001). Methylation of histone H3 lysine 9 creates a binding site for HP1 proteins. Nature 410, 116–120. https://doi.org/10.1038/35065132. Lafontaine, D.L.J., Riback, J.A., Bascetin, R., and Brangwynne, C.P. (2021). The nucleolus as a multiphase liquid condensate. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol 22, 165–182. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-020-0272-6. Larson, A.G., Elnatan, D., Keenen, M.M., Trnka, M.J., Johnston, J.B., Burlingame, A.L., Agard, D.A., Redding, S., and Narlikar, G.J. (2017). Liquid droplet formation by HP1a suggests a role for phase separation in heterochromatin. Nature 547, 236–240. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22822. Lechner, M.S., Schultz, D.C., Negorev, D., Maul, G.G., and Rauscher, F.J. (2005). The mammalian heterochromatin protein 1 binds diverse nuclear proteins through a common motif that targets the chromoshadow domain. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 331, 929–937. Leemans, C., van der Zwalm, M.C., Brueckner, L., Comoglio, F., van Schaik, T., Pagie, L., van Arensbergen, J., and van Steensel, B. (2019). Promoterintrinsic and local chromatin features determine gene repression in LADs. Cell 177, 852–864.e14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.03.009. Lehnertz, B., Ueda, Y., Derijck, A.A., Braunschweig, U., Perez-Burgos, L., Kubicek, S., Chen, T., Li, E., Jenuwein, T., and Peters, A.H. (2003). Suv39h-mediated histone H3 lysine 9 methylation directs DNA methylation to major satellite repeats at pericentric heterochromatin. Curr. Biol. 13, 1192–1200. https://doi. org/10.1016/s0960-9822(03)00432-9. Lieberman-Aiden, E., van Berkum, N.L., Williams, L., Imakaev, M., Ragoczy, T., Telling, A., Amit, I., Lajoie, B.R., Sabo, P.J., Dorschner, M.O., et al. (2009). Comprehensive mapping of long-range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome. Science 326, 289–293. https://doi.org/10. 1126/science.1181369. Lima-de-Faria, A., and Jaworska, H. (1968). Late DNA synthesis in heterochromatin. Nature 217, 138–142. https://doi.org/10.1038/217138a0. Liu, S., Brind’Amour, J., Karimi, M.M., Shirane, K., Bogutz, A., Lefebvre, L., Sasaki, H., Shinkai, Y., and Lorincz, M.C. (2014). Setdb1 is required for germline development and silencing of H3K9me3-marked endogenous retroviruses in primordial germ cells. Genes Dev. 28, 2041–2055. https://doi.org/10.1101/ gad.244848.114. Liu, Y., Nanni, L., Sungalee, S., Zufferey, M., Tavernari, D., Mina, M., Ceri, S., Oricchio, E., and Ciriello, G. (2021). Systematic inference and comparison of multi-scale chromatin sub-compartments connects spatial organization to cell phenotypes. Nat. Commun. 12, 2439. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467021-22666-3. Lupski, J.R., and Stankiewicz, P. (2005). Genomic disorders: molecular mechanisms for rearrangements and conveyed phenotypes. PLoS Genet. 1, e49. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.0010049. MacPherson, Q., Beltran, B., and Spakowitz, A.J. (2018). Bottom-up modeling of chromatin segregation due to epigenetic modifications. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, 12739–12744. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1812268115. Maeda, R., and Tachibana, M. (2022). HP1 maintains protein stability of H3K9 methyltransferases and demethylases. EMBO Rep. 23, e53581. https://doi. org/10.15252/embr.202153581. Magklara, A., Yen, A., Colquitt, B., Clowney, E., Allen, W., Markenscoff-Papadimitriou, E., Evans, Z., Kheradpour, P., Mountoufaris, G., Carey, C., et al. (2011). An epigenetic signature for monoallelic olfactory receptor expression. Cell 145, 555–570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.03.040. Maison, C., Bailly, D., Roche, D., Montes de Oca, R., Probst, A.V., Vassias, I., Dingli, F., Lombard, B., Loew, D., Quivy, J.-P., et al. (2011). SUMOylation promotes de novo targeting of HP1a to pericentric heterochromatin. Nat Genet 43, 220–227. Martin, M.A., Bryan, T., Rasheed, S., and Khan, A.S. (1981). Identification and cloning of endogenous retroviral sequences present in human DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78, 4892–4896. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.78.8.4892. Mateo, L.J., Murphy, S.E., Hafner, A., Cinquini, I.S., Walker, C.A., and Boettiger, A.N. (2019). Visualizing DNA folding and RNA in embryos at single-cell resolution. Nature 568, 49–54.

McClintock, B. (1950). The origin and behavior of mutable loci in maize. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 36, 344–355. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.36.6.344. McKinley, K.L., and Cheeseman, I.M. (2016). The molecular basis for centromere identity and function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 17, 16–29. Melcher, M., Schmid, M., Aagaard, L., Selenko, P., Laible, G., and Jenuwein, T. (2000). Structure-function analysis of SUV39H1 reveals a dominant role in heterochromatin organization, chromosome segregation, and mitotic progression. Mol. Cell Biol 20, 3728–3741. https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.20.10.37283741.2000. Millán-Zambrano, G., Burton, A., Bannister, A.J., and Schneider, R. (2022). Histone post-translational modifications - cause and consequence of genome function. Nat. Rev. Genet. Mitrentsi, I., Lou, J., Kerjouan, A., Verigos, J., Reina-San-Martin, B., Hinde, E., and Soutoglou, E. (2022). Heterochromatic repeat clustering imposes a physical barrier on homologous recombination to prevent chromosomal translocations. Mol. Cell 82, 2132–2147.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2022. 03.033. Muller, H.J., and Altenburg, E. (1930). The frequency of translocations produced by X-rays in Drosophila. Genetics 15, 283–311. https://doi.org/10. 1093/genetics/15.4.283. Nakayama, J., Rice, J.C., Strahl, B.D., Allis, C.D., and Grewal, S.I.S. (2001). Role of histone H3 lysine 9 methylation in epigenetic control of heterochromatin assembly. Science 292, 110–113. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.106 0118. Németh, A., Conesa, A., Santoyo-Lopez, J., Medina, I., Montaner, D., Péterfia, B., Solovei, I., Cremer, T., Dopazo, J., and Längst, G. (2010). Initial genomics of the human nucleolus. PLoS Genet. 6, e1000889. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1000889. Nicetto, D., Donahue, G., Jain, T., Peng, T., Sidoli, S., Sheng, L., Montavon, T., Becker, J.S., Grindheim, J.M., Blahnik, K., et al. (2019). H3K9me3-heterochromatin loss at protein-coding genes enables developmental lineage specification. Science 363, 294–297. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau0583. Nir, G., Farabella, I., Pérez Estrada, C., Ebeling, C.G., Beliveau, B.J., Sasaki, H.M., Lee, S.D., Nguyen, S.C., McCole, R.B., Chattoraj, S., et al. (2018). Walking along chromosomes with super-resolution imaging, contact maps, and integrative modeling. PLoS Genet. 14, e1007872. https://doi.org/10. 1371/journal.pgen.1007872. Nora, E.P., Goloborodko, A., Valton, A.L., Gibcus, J.H., Uebersohn, A., Abdennur, N., Dekker, J., Mirny, L.A., and Bruneau, B.G. (2017). Targeted degradation of CTCF decouples local insulation of chromosome domains from genomic compartmentalization. Cell 169, 930–944.e22. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.cell.2017.05.004. Nora, E.P., Lajoie, B.R., Schulz, E.G., Giorgetti, L., Okamoto, I., Servant, N., Piolot, T., van Berkum, N.L., Meisig, J., Sedat, J., et al. (2012). Spatial partitioning of the regulatory landscape of the X-inactivation centre. Nature 485, 381– 385. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11049. Norton, H.K., Emerson, D.J., Huang, H., Kim, J., Titus, K.R., Gu, S., Bassett, D.S., and Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2018). Detecting hierarchical genome folding with network modularity. Nat. Methods 15, 119–122. https://doi.org/10.1038/ nmeth.4560. Norton, H.K., and Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2017). Crossed wires: 3D genome misfolding in human disease. J. Cell Biol 216, 3441–3452. https://doi.org/10. 1083/jcb.201611001. Nurk, S., Koren, S., Rhie, A., Rautiainen, M., Bzikadze, A.V., Mikheenko, A., Vollger, M.R., Altemose, N., Uralsky, L., Gershman, A., et al. (2022). The complete sequence of a human genome. Science 376, 44–53. https://doi.org/10. 1126/science.abj6987. Oberlé, I., Rousseau, F., Heitz, D., Kretz, C., Devys, D., Hanauer, A., Boué, J., Bertheas, M.F., and Mandel, J.L. (1991). Instability of a 550-base pair DNA segment and abnormal methylation in fragile X syndrome. Science 252, 1097–1102. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.252.5009.1097.

[Page 17]

Orr, H.T., and Zoghbi, H.Y. (2007). Trinucleotide repeat disorders. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30, 575–621. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605. 113042.

Saksouk, N., Simboeck, E., and Déjardin, J. (2015). Constitutive heterochromatin formation and transcription in mammals. Epigenetics Chromatin 8, 3. https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-8935-8-3.

Payer, L.M., Steranka, J.P., Ardeljan, D., Walker, J., Fitzgerald, K.C., Calabresi, P.A., Cooper, T.A., and Burns, K.H. (2019). Alu insertion variants alter mRNA splicing. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, 421–431. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/ gky1086.

Sanborn, A.L., Rao, S.S.P., Huang, S.C., Durand, N.C., Huntley, M.H., Jewett, A.I., Bochkov, I.D., Chinnappan, D., Cutkosky, A., Li, J., et al. (2015). Chromatin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in wildtype and engineered genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, E6456– E6465. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518552112.

Peters, A.H., O’Carroll, D., Scherthan, H., Mechtler, K., Sauer, S., Schöfer, C., Weipoltshammer, K., Pagani, M., Lachner, M., Kohlmaier, A., et al. (2001). Loss of the Suv39h histone methyltransferases impairs mammalian heterochromatin and genome stability. Cell 107, 323–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/s00928674(01)00542-6. Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2014). Unraveling architecture of the pluripotent genome. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol 28, 96–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb. 2014.04.006. Phillips-Cremins, J., Sauria, M., Sanyal, A., Gerasimova, T., Lajoie, B., Bell, J., Ong, C.T., Hookway, T., Guo, C., Sun, Y., et al. (2013). Architectural protein subclasses shape 3D organization of genomes during lineage commitment. Cell 153, 1281–1295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.04.053. Pickersgill, H., Kalverda, B., de Wit, E., Talhout, W., Fornerod, M., and van Steensel, B. (2006). Characterization of the Drosophila melanogaster genome at the nuclear lamina. Nat. Genet. 38, 1005–1014. https://doi.org/10.1038/ ng1852. Quinodoz, S.A., Ollikainen, N., Tabak, B., Palla, A., Schmidt, J.M., Detmar, E., Lai, M.M., Shishkin, A.A., Bhat, P., Takei, Y., et al. (2018). Higher-order interchromosomal hubs shape 3D genome organization in the nucleus. Cell 174, 744–757.e24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.024. Rao, S., Huntley, M., Durand, N., Stamenova, E., Bochkov, I., Robinson, J., Sanborn, A., Machol, I., Omer, A., Lander, E., and Aiden, E. (2014). A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping. Cell 159, 1665–1680. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014. 11.021. Rao, S.S., Huang, S.C., Glenn St Hilaire, B., Engreitz, J.M., Perez, E.M., Kieffer-Kwon, K.R., Sanborn, A.L., Johnstone, S.E., Bascom, G.D., Bochkov, I.D., et al. (2017). Cohesin loss eliminates all loop domains. Cell 171, 305– 320.e24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.09.026. Rea, S., Eisenhaber, F., O’Carroll, D., Strahl, B.D., Sun, Z.W., Schmid, M., Opravil, S., Mechtler, K., Ponting, C.P., Allis, C.D., and Jenuwein, T. (2000). Regulation of chromatin structure by site-specific histone H3 methyltransferases. Nature 406, 593–599. https://doi.org/10.1038/35020506. Reddy, K.L., Zullo, J.M., Bertolino, E., and Singh, H. (2008). Transcriptional repression mediated by repositioning of genes to the nuclear lamina. Nature 452, 243–247. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06727. Reik, W., and Surani, M.A. (2015). Germline and pluripotent stem cells. Cold Spring Harb Perspect. Biol. 7, a019422. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a019422. Reute, G., and Spierer, P. (1992). Position effect variegation and chromatin proteins. Bioessays 14, 605–612. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.950140907. Rice, J.C., Briggs, S.D., Ueberheide, B., Barber, C.M., Shabanowitz, J., Hunt, D.F., Shinkai, Y., and Allis, C.D. (2003). Histone methyltransferases direct different degrees of methylation to define distinct chromatin domains. Mol Cell 12, 1591–1598. Rothbart, S.B., Krajewski, K., Nady, N., Tempel, W., Xue, S., Badeaux, A.I., Barsyte-Lovejoy, D., Martinez, J.Y., Bedford, M.T., Fuchs, S.M., et al. (2012). Association of UHRF1 with methylated H3K9 directs the maintenance of DNA methylation. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 19, 1155–1160. https://doi.org/10. 1038/nsmb.2391. Rowley, M.J., Nichols, M.H., Lyu, X., Ando-Kuri, M., Rivera, I.S.M., Hermetz, K., Wang, P., Ruan, Y., and Corces, V.G. (2017). Evolutionarily conserved principles predict 3D chromatin organization. Mol. Cell 67, 837–852.e7. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.07.022.

Santoni, F.A., Guerra, J., and Luban, J. (2012). HERV-H RNA is abundant in human embryonic stem cells and a precise marker for pluripotency. Retrovirology 9, 111. https://doi.org/10.1186/1742-4690-9-111. Schmid, C.W., and Deininger, P.L. (1975). Sequence organization of the human genome. Cell 6, 345–358. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(75) 90184-1. Schmidt, D., Schwalie, P., Wilson, M., Ballester, B., Gonçalves, Â., Kutter, C., Brown, G., Marshall, A., Flicek, P., and Odom, D. (2012). Waves of retrotransposon expansion remodel genome organization and CTCF binding in multiple mammalian lineages. Cell 148, 832. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012. 02.001. Schultz, D.C., Ayyanathan, K., Negorev, D., Maul, G.G., and Rauscher, F.J., 3rd. (2002). SETDB1: a novel KAP-1-associated histone H3, lysine 9-specific methyltransferase that contributes to HP1-mediated silencing of euchromatic genes by KRAB zinc-finger proteins. Genes Dev. 16, 919–932. https://doi.org/ 10.1101/gad.973302. Schwarzer, W., Abdennur, N., Goloborodko, A., Pekowska, A., Fudenberg, G., Loe-Mie, Y., Fonseca, N.A., Huber, W., Haering, C.H., Mirny, L., and Spitz, F. (2017). Two independent modes of chromatin organization revealed by cohesin removal. Nature 551, 51–56. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24281. Seczynska, M., Bloor, S., Cuesta, S.M., and Lehner, P.J. (2022). Genome surveillance by HUSH-mediated silencing of intronless mobile elements. Nature 601, 440–445. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04228-1. See, K., Kiseleva, A.A., Smith, C.L., Liu, F., Li, J., Poleshko, A., and Epstein, J.A. (2020). Histone methyltransferase activity programs nuclear peripheral genome positioning. Dev. Biol. 466, 90–98. Seisenberger, S., Andrews, S., Krueger, F., Arand, J., Walter, J., Santos, F., Popp, C., Thienpont, B., Dean, W., and Reik, W. (2012). The dynamics of genome-wide DNA methylation reprogramming in mouse primordial germ cells. Mol. Cell 48, 849–862. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2012.11.001. Sexton, T., Yaffe, E., Kenigsberg, E., Bantignies, F., Leblanc, B., Hoichman, M., Parrinello, H., Tanay, A., and Cavalli, G. (2012). Three-dimensional folding and functional organization principles of the Drosophila genome. Cell 148, 458–472. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.01.010. Shay, J.W., and Wright, W.E. (2019). Telomeres and telomerase: three decades of progress. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20, 299–309. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41576-019-0099-1. Smallwood, A., Estève, P.-O., Pradhan, S., and Carey, M. (2007). Functional cooperation between HP1 and DNMT1 mediates gene silencing. Genes Dev 21, 1169–1178. Smothers, J.F., and Henikoff, S. (2000). The HP1 chromo shadow domain binds a consensus peptide pentamer. Curr Biol 10, 27–30. Solovei, I., Wang, A., Thanisch, K., Schmidt, C., Krebs, S., Zwerger, M., Cohen, T., Devys, D., Foisner, R., Peichl, L., et al. (2013). LBR and lamin A/C sequentially tether peripheral heterochromatin and inversely regulate differentiation. Cell 152, 584–598. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.01.009. Soufi, A., Donahue, G., and Zaret, K. (2012). Facilitators and impediments of the pluripotency reprogramming factors’ initial engagement with the genome. Cell 151, 994–1004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.09.045. Spracklin, G., Abdennur, N., Imakaev, M., Chowdhury, N., Pradhan, S., Mirny, L., and Dekker, J. (2021). Heterochromatin diversity modulates genome compartmentalization and loop extrusion barriers. Preprint at bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.08.05.455340.

[Page 18]

Strom, A.R., Emelyanov, A.V., Mir, M., Fyodorov, D.V., Darzacq, X., and Karpen, G.H. (2017). Phase separation drives heterochromatin domain formation. Nature 547, 241–245. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22989. Su, J.H., Zheng, P., Kinrot, S.S., Bintu, B., and Zhuang, X. (2020). Genomescale imaging of the 3D organization and transcriptional activity of chromatin. Cell 182, 1641–1659.e26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.07.032. Sun, J.H., Zhou, L., Emerson, D.J., Phyo, S.A., Titus, K.R., Gong, W., Gilgenast, T.G., Beagan, J.A., Davidson, B.L., Tassone, F., and Phillips-Cremins, J.E. (2018). Disease-associated short tandem repeats Co-localize with chromatin domain boundaries. Cell 175, 224–238.e15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cell.2018.08.005. Sundaram, V., and Wysocka, J. (2020). Transposable elements as a potent source of diverse cis-regulatory sequences in mammalian genomes. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 375, 20190347. https://doi.org/10.1098/ rstb.2019.0347.

by histone methylation but not by DNA methylation. Nat. Commun. 6, 6569. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7569. Velazquez Camacho, O., Galan, C., Swist-Rosowska, K., Ching, R., Gamalinda, M., Karabiber, F., De La Rosa-Velazquez, I., Engist, B., Koschorz, B., Shukeir, N., et al. (2017). Major satellite repeat RNA stabilize heterochromatin retention of Suv39h enzymes by RNA-nucleosome association and RNA:DNA hybrid formation. eLife 6, e25293. https://doi.org/10.7554/elife.25293. Verkerk, A.J., Pieretti, M., Sutcliffe, J.S., Fu, Y.H., Kuhl, D.P., Pizzuti, A., Reiner, O., Richards, S., Victoria, M.F., Zhang, F., et al. (1991). Identification of a gene (FMR-1) containing a CGG repeat coincident with a breakpoint cluster region exhibiting length variation in fragile X syndrome. Cell 65, 905–914. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(91)90397-h. Verma, P., and Greenberg, R.A. (2021). Communication between chromatin and homologous recombination. Curr. Opin. Genet. Develop. 71, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gde.2021.05.006.

Sutcliffe, J.S., Nelson, D.L., Zhang, F., Pieretti, M., Caskey, C.T., Saxe, D., and Warren, S.T. (1992). DNA methylation represses FMR-1 transcription in fragile X syndrome. Hum. Mol. Genet. 1, 397–400. https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/1. 6.397.

Vertii, A., Ou, J., Yu, J., Yan, A., Pagès, H., Liu, H., Zhu, L.J., and Kaufman, P.D. (2019). Two contrasting classes of nucleolus-associated domains in mouse fibroblast heterochromatin. Genome Res. 29, 1235–1249. https://doi.org/10. 1101/gr.247072.118.

Takei, Y., Yun, J., Zheng, S., Ollikainen, N., Pierson, N., White, J., Shah, S., Thomassie, J., Suo, S., Eng, C.-H.L., et al. (2021). Integrated spatial genomics reveals global architecture of single nuclei. Nature 590, 344–350.

Wallrath, L.L., and Elgin, S.C. (1995). Position effect variegation in Drosophila is associated with an altered chromatin structure. Genes Dev. 9, 1263–1277. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.9.10.1263.

Tchasovnikarova, I.A., Timms, R.T., Matheson, N.J., Wals, K., Antrobus, R., Göttgens, B., Dougan, G., Dawson, M.A., and Lehner, P.J. (2015). GENE SILENCING. Epigenetic silencing by the HUSH complex mediates position-effect variegation in human cells. Science 348, 1481–1485. https://doi.org/10. 1126/science.aaa7227. Thakur, J., Packiaraj, J., and Henikoff, S. (2021). Sequence, chromatin and evolution of satellite DNA. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 4309. https://doi.org/10.3390/ ijms22094309. Towbin, B., González-Aguilera, C., Sack, R., Gaidatzis, D., Kalck, V., Meister, P., Askjaer, P., and Gasser, S. (2012). Step-wise methylation of histone H3K9 positions heterochromatin at the nuclear periphery. Cell 150, 934–947. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.06.051. Tsouroula, K., Furst, A., Rogier, M., Heyer, V., Maglott-Roth, A., Ferrand, A., Reina-San-Martin, B., and Soutoglou, E. (2016). Temporal and spatial uncoupling of DNA double strand break repair pathways within mammalian heterochromatin. Mol. Cell 63, 293–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2016. 06.002. Tunbak, H., Enriquez-Gasca, R., Tie, C.H.C., Gould, P.A., Mlcochova, P., Gupta, R.K., Fernandes, L., Holt, J., van der Veen, A.G., Giampazolias, E., et al. (2020). The HUSH complex is a gatekeeper of type I interferon through epigenetic regulation of LINE-1s. Nat. Commun. 11, 5387. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41467-020-19170-5. Tyler-Smith, C., and Brown, W.R. (1987). Structure of the major block of alphoid satellite DNA on the human Y chromosome. J. Mol. Biol. 195, 457– 470. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(87)90175-6. van Koningsbruggen, S., Gierli nski, M., Schofield, P., Martin, D., Barton, G.J., Ariyurek, Y., den Dunnen, J.T., and Lamond, A.I. (2010). High-resolution whole-genome sequencing reveals that specific chromatin domains from most human chromosomes associate with nucleoli. Mol. Biol. Cell 21, 3735– 3748. https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e10-06-0508. van Steensel, B., and Belmont, A.S. (2017). Lamina-associated domains: links with chromosome architecture, heterochromatin, and gene repression. Cell 169, 780–791. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.04.022. Varshney, D., Vavrova-Anderson, J., Oler, A.J., Cowling, V.H., Cairns, B.R., and White, R.J. (2015). SINE transcription by RNA polymerase III is suppressed

Wang, C., Liu, X., Gao, Y., Yang, L., Li, C., Liu, W., Chen, C., Kou, X., Zhao, Y., Chen, J., et al. (2018a). Reprogramming of H3K9me3-dependent heterochromatin during mammalian embryo development. Nat. Cell Biol 20, 620–631. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-018-0093-4. Wang, H., Xu, X., Nguyen, C.M., Liu, Y., Gao, Y., Lin, X., Daley, T., Kipniss, N.H., La Russa, M., and Qi, L.S. (2018b). CRISPR-mediated Programmable 3D genome positioning and nuclear organization. Cell 175, 1405–1417.e14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.09.013. Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhang, R., van Schaik, T., Zhang, L., Sasaki, T., PericHupkes, D., Chen, Y., Gilbert, D.M., van Steensel, B., et al. (2021). SPIN reveals genome-wide landscape of nuclear compartmentalization. Genome Biol. 22, 36. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-020-02253-3. Ye, Q., Callebaut, I., Pezhman, A., Courvalin, J.C., and Worman, H.J. (1997). Domain-specific interactions of human HP1-type chromodomain proteins and inner nuclear membrane protein LBR. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 14983–14989. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.23.14983. Yu, J.R., Lee, C.H., Oksuz, O., Stafford, J.M., and Reinberg, D. (2019). PRC2 is high maintenance. Genes Dev. 33, 903–935. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad. 325050.119. Yu, S., Pritchard, M., Kremer, E., Lynch, M., Nancarrow, J., Baker, E., Holman, K., Mulley, J.C., Warren, S.T., Schlessinger, D., et al. (1991). Fragile X genotype characterized by an unstable region of DNA. Science 252, 1179–1181. https:// doi.org/10.1126/science.252.5009.1179. Zenk, F., Zhan, Y., Kos, P., Löser, E., Atinbayeva, N., Schächtle, M., Tiana, G., Giorgetti, L., and Iovino, N. (2021). HP1 drives de novo 3D genome reorganization in early Drosophila embryos. Nature 593, 289–293. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41586-021-03460-z. Zhang, Y., Li, T., Preissl, S., Amaral, M.L., Grinstein, J.D., Farah, E.N., Destici, E., Qiu, Y., Hu, R., Lee, A.Y., et al. (2019). Transcriptionally active HERV-H retrotransposons demarcate topologically associating domains in human pluripotent stem cells. Nat. Genet. 51, 1380–1388. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588019-0479-7. Zhou, L., Ge, C., Malachowski, T., Kim, J.H., Chandradoss, K.R., Su, C., Wu, H., Rojas, A., Wallace, O., Titus, K.R., et al. (2021). Spatially coordinated heterochromatinization of distal short tandem repeats in fragile X syndrome. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.23.441217.
