[Page 1]

Born to run: control of transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II Fei Xavier Chen , Edwin R. Smith and Ali Shilatifard*

Abstract | The dynamic regulation of transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II (Pol II) is an integral part of the implementation of gene expression programmes during development. In most metazoans, the majority of transcribed genes exhibit transient pausing of Pol II at promoter-​ proximal regions, and the release of Pol II into gene bodies is controlled by many regulatory factors that respond to environmental and developmental cues. Misregulation of the elongation stage of transcription is implicated in cancer and other human diseases, suggesting that mechanistic understanding of transcription elongation control is therapeutically relevant. In this Review, we discuss the features, establishment and maintenance of Pol II pausing, the transition into productive elongation, the control of transcription elongation by enhancers and by factors of other cellular processes, such as topoisomerases and poly(ADP-​ribose) polymerases (PARPs), and the potential of therapeutic targeting of the elongation stage of transcription by Pol II. Super elongation complex (SEC). A complex containing the most active form of positive transcription elongation factor-b; required for almost all rapid inductions of transcription and for release of paused RNA polymerase II.

Simpson Querrey Center for Epigenetics and the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA. *e-​mail: ash@ northwestern.edu https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41580-018-0010-5

Genome-​wide studies have demonstrated that following transcription initiation, most metazoan genes undergo a regulatory step termed promoter-​proximal pausing1,2. After transcribing 20–120 nucleotides downstream of the transcription start site (TSS), RNA polymerase II (Pol II) pauses; its release into productive elongation requires the activity of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-​TEFb), which is a kinase composed of the catalytic subunit cyclin-​dependent kinase 9 (CDK9) and its regulatory subunit, cyclin T3–5. The activity of P-​TEFb is highly regulated, being part of at least three larger complexes: the super elongation complex (SEC)6,7, bromodomain-​ containing protein 4 (BRD4)-associated P-​T EFb (BRD4–P-​TEFb)8,9 and 7SK small nuclear ribonucleo protein (snRNP)-associated P-​TEFb (7SK–P-​TEFb)10,11. Pol II that is released to transcribe into gene bodies interacts with additional elongation factors that enhance its processivity, modify the chromatin landscape and regulate co-​transcriptional RNA processing12. Many transcription elongation factors, such as P-​TEFb, transcription factor S-​II, elongin A and eleven-​ nineteen lysine-​rich leukaemia protein (ELL), were originally identified in vitro by biochemical methods13. For example, P-​TEFb was purified from Drosophila melanogaster cell extracts as a factor sensitive to the transcription elongation inhibitor 5,6-dichloro-1-β-​ d-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB), whereas the ELL component of the SEC was purified from rat liver extracts as a factor that suppresses transient pausing of Pol II (refs14,15). Other transcription elongation factors were identified from genetic screens16, and some of these, such as the product of the SPT genes, are orthologues of factors

that have also been identified from in vitro studies17. More recently, transcription elongation factors have been identified by genome-​wide profiling of factors previously implicated in other cellular processes, including topoisomerases and poly(ADP-​ribose) polymerases (PARPs), thereby uncovering interconnectivity between DNA replication, DNA damage repair and transcription elongation control. In this Review, we discuss recent advances in characterizing the general features of Pol II pausing and the regulation of early and late transcription elongation steps. We discuss the progress and remaining challenges in understanding the molecular mechanisms of elongation control by comparing the functions of several pausing and elongation factors, including negative elongation factor (NELF), DRB sensitivity-​inducing factor (DSIF), Pol II-​associated factor 1 (PAF1) and the P-​TEFb-containing complexes (Table 1). We also discuss the roles of distal enhancers and factors such as topoisomerases and PARPs, which function in other cellular processes, in the regulation of transcription elongation by Pol II. On the basis of these findings, we forecast the potential directions in therapeutic targeting of the regu lation of the elongation stage of transcription by Pol II in cancer and other human diseases.

Features of Pol II pausing control One of the first genes found to undergo promoter-​ proximal pausing of Pol II was the D. melanogaster heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) gene in non-​heat shock conditions18,19. Subsequently, promoter-​proximal pausing in D. melanogaster was found to occur at highly transcribed

[Page 2]

Table 1 | Pausing-​related factors Pausing-​related factors

Subunits

Occupancy

Function in pausing

Refs

NELF

• NELF-​A • NELF-​B • NELF-​C or NELF-​D • NELF-​E

Promoter

Stabilizes paused Pol II by preventing premature promoter-​ proximal termination

DSIF

• SPT4 • SPT5

• Promoter • Gene body

Promotes the recruitment of NELF and capping factors

88,91,92

PAF1C

• PAF1 • CTR9 • LEO1 • Parafibromin • WDR61 • RTF1

• Enhancer • Promoter • Gene body

Modulates enhancer activity and maintains paused Pol II by hindering its release into productive elongation

25,112,113,269

Gdown1a

–

Promoter

Blocks TFIIF recruitment and prevents early termination of promoter-​proximal Pol II

106,109,205

PARP1

–

• Enhancer • Promoter

ADP-​ribosylates NELF and inhibits its function in pausing

242

P-​TEFb

• CDK9 • CCNT1 or CCNT2

• Enhancer • Promoter • Gene body

Phosphorylates the Pol II CTD, NELF and the SPT5 CTR to promote release from pausing

127

SEC

• AFF1 or AFF4 • ELL2 • AF9 or ENL • EAF1 or EAF2 • P-​TEFb

• Enhancer • Promoter • Gene body

Most active P-​TEFb-containing complex; promotes rapid release of paused Pol II into productive elongation

6,7,125,128

BRD4–P-​TEFb

• BRD4 • P-​TEFb

• Enhancer • Promoter • Gene body

Stimulates P-​TEFb activity and promotes pause release

9,132

7SK–P-​TEFb

• 7SK snRNP • MEPCE • LARP7 • HEXIM1 or HEXIM 2 • P-​TEFb

Promoter

Sequesters P-​TEFb and prevents pause release

28,88,100,101

10,11,127

AF9, ALL1-fused gene from chromosome 9 protein; AFF1, AF4/FMR2 family member 1; BRD4, bromodomain-​containing protein 4; CCNT1, cyclin T1; CDK9, cyclin-​dependent kinase 9; CTD, carboxy-​terminal domain; CTR , carboxy-​terminal region; CTR9, RNA polymerase-​associated protein CTR9 homologue; DSIF, DRB sensitivity-​inducing factor ; EAF, ELL-​associated factor ELL, eleven-​ nineteen lysine-​rich leukaemia protein; ENL , eleven-​nineteen leukaemia; L ARP7 , La-​related protein 7; LEO1, PAF1/RNA polymerase II complex component LEO1; MEPCE, methyl phosphate capping enzyme; NELF, negative elongation factor ; PAF1C, RNA polymerase II-​associated factor 1 complex; PARP1, poly(ADP-​ribose) polymerase 1; P-​TEFb, positive transcription elongation factor b; RTF1, PAF1/RNA polymerase II complex component RTF1 homologue; SEC, super elongation complex; snRNP, small nuclear ribonucleoprotein; SPT4, transcription elongation factor SPT4; SPT5, transcription elongation factor SPT5; TFIIF, transcription factor IIF; WDR61, WD repeat-​containing protein 61. aGdown1 is a subunit of the Pol II complex Pol II(G).

Pausing index An estimate of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) promoter-​ proximal pausing; the ratio of Pol II occupancy at the promoter-​proximal region compared with the gene body.

Travelling ratio The ratio of gene-​body RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to promoter-​proximal Pol II.

Initiating Pol II RNA polymerase II that is recruited by the general transcription factors and is involved in promoter melting before being released for transcription.

housekeeping genes20. Genome-​wide profiling methods firmly established that pausing occurred at the majority of Pol II-​transcribed genes1,21. The importance of understanding promoter-​proximal pausing has long been recognized, not only because of the importance of stress response pathways but also because important developmental genes such as MYC and transcription of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) provirus were long known to be regulated at this step22. These and other studies discussed below established several features that are common to promoter-​proximal pausing of Pol II. The stability and dynamics of pausing. The degree of pausing is generally estimated from the pausing index (or stalling index)1,21 or by the inverse travelling ratio (or Pol II release ratio)23–25. Although instructive in certain situations, these ratios reflect the net residence of the initiating Pol II and elongating Pol II during a series

of transcription stages but do not report on the stability and dynamics of pausing. Recently, the ability to measure the dynamics of Pol II pausing was made possible by the discovery of triptolide, a compound extracted from a traditional Chinese medicine that can inhibit the ATPase activity of the xeroderma pigmentosum group B-​complementing protein (XPB), the helicase subunit of the general transcription factor (GTF) IIH (TFIIH)26. Triptolide treatment prevents transcription reinitiation by Pol II and therefore enables the fate of pre-​existing paused Pol II to be measured at different time points of treatment. Such studies have shown that genes differ in the time of residency of Pol II at the promoter-​proximal region, from a few minutes for most genes to an hour for a very few stably paused genes27–30. Although the half-​life of paused Pol II generally correlates with the pausing index, the former better predicts the steady-​state levels of mRNA23,29,31, such that genes with the longest half-​life of paused Pol II rather than the highest pausing index are

[Page 3]

Paused Pol II RNA polymerase II that has initiated non-​productive transcription and is transiently pausing at the promoter-​proximal region.

Bisulfite sequencing Bisulfite deaminates unmethylated DNA cytosine into uracil, which can be used to infer the position of methylated cytosine through sequencing.

TATA box A short AT-​rich motif found in many RNA polymerase II promoters; bound by the general transcription factor TATA-​binding protein.

G-​quadruplex (G4). A highly stable nucleic acid structure comprising two or more stacked guanine tetrads. Intramolecular G-​ quadruplexes formed in nascent RNA can contribute to RNA polymerase II pausing.

more likely to be lowly expressed. The lack of correlation between pausing index and pausing stability was recently demonstrated using methylation footprinting with whole genome bisulfite sequencing32. Some genes with a high pausing index and low expression level have residency times of paused Pol II of just a few minutes, suggesting that some genes with a high pausing index are undergoing rounds of initiation and promoter-​proximal termination32. A long-​s tanding question is what causes some genes to exhibit more pausing than other genes and how gene-​specific pause–release is regulated during development and in response to environmental cues. Several studies have examined the specific DNA and chromatin features associated with promoters of genes with Pol II pausing. Over 20 years ago, the TATA box at the MYC promoter was shown to be required for pausing at this gene22. Later, genome-​wide analyses in D. melanogaster found that paused promoters that tend to have high GC content are enriched for a promoter element called the pause button and for the presence of the GAGA motif (which recruits transcription factor GAGA) and tend to lack a TATA box33–35. Although promoter elements are generally less well defined in mammalian cells, paused promoters in mammalian cells also tend to have high GC content and tend to lack a TATA box2,31. R-​loops contribute to Pol II pausing. R-​loops are RNA– DNA hybrids formed when the nascent RNA hybridizes with the template strand of DNA during transcription (leaving the non-​template, or coding strand, looping out)36,37. RNA–DNA hybrids are more stable than double-​ stranded DNA (dsDNA) and thus can block access of successive Pol II to the DNA template38–40. Interestingly, the GC skew that is correlated with pausing also favours the formation of R-​loops owing to the higher thermodynamic stability of RNA–DNA hybrids bearing G-​rich RNA36,41–43. The capacity of the exposed coding strand to form stable G-​quadruplex (G4) structures could further stabilize R-loops44,45. Indeed, G4 motifs correlate with promoter-​proximal pausing46. However, paused Pol II mainly localizes 20–120 nucleotides downstream of the TSS whereas R-​loops can cover wider regions of the transcription unit, peaking around 1.5 kb downstream of the TSS37,47. This suggests that R-​loops are more broadly involved in the control of the processive stage of transcription elongation. Pausing and nucleosome features. Nucleosome-​free regions (NFRs), as determined by micrococcal nuclease sequencing (MNase-​s eq), are found at promoters of actively transcribed genes and correlate with promoter-​proximal Pol II levels48–50. However, NFRs are also found by MNase-​seq in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which lacks promoter-​proximal pausing51–54, indicating that the establishment of the NFR is associated with but not exclusive to paused promoters. GC-​rich sequences favour intrinsic nucleosome occupancy55,56, although in vivo, the lowest nucleosome occupancy can be seen at paused promoters with high GC content, perhaps because paused Pol II competes with histones

for DNA binding to sustain an open chromatin structure at promoters48,49,56,57. However, one study found that GC content, independent of transcription or pausing, can explain the position of the NFR58, which could potentially involve the additional action of chromatin remodellers59. One caveat of MNase-​based assays is the sequence preference of MNase, which is biased towards AT-​ rich sequences, as well as its differential sensitivity to nucleosomes of different conformations. For example, using mainly limited or titrated enzyme digestion, a class of MNase-​hypersensitive nucleosomes termed fragile nucleosomes has been reported at NFRs of promoters in yeast and higher eukaryotes60–66. However, it has also been suggested that these MNase-​hypersensitive particles at promoters are non-​histone complexes67,68. As an alternative strategy, chemical mapping of histone H4 was used to directly map nucleosome occupancy, which confirmed the presence of fragile nucleosomes. Notably, fragile nucleosomes were found in the mouse and Schizosaccharomyces pombe genomes, but not in S. cerevisiae69, which coincides with the presence of paused Pol II in these species52. Indeed, nucleosome levels measured by chemical mapping appear to correlate with the degree of pausing, opposing the interpretation of early studies using MNase. The discrepancy could be due to the different sensitivities of chemical mapping and MNase-​based assays in detecting the unique nucleo some structure around paused promoters, which exhibit a looser conformation and higher rate of nucleosome turnover (nucleosome remodelling). Nucleosome composition can also influence pausing, for example, nucleosomes with the histone variant H2A.Z are less stable and are suggested to negatively correlate with the establishment of pausing31,70,71. However, the exact content and conformation of the nucleosomes around promoters as well as their interplay with the dynamics of pausing remain to be fully examined.

The establishment of Pol II pausing Transcription initiation by Pol II commences with the assembly of the preinitiation complex (PIC), which includes the polymerase, GTFs and a large number of co-​regulators (reviewed in refs72,73) (Fig. 1a). This process occurs in a stepwise manner with TFIIH, which is a complex comprising about ten subunits, and is the last essential component of the PIC to be recruited. TFIIH is unique among the GTFs as it is required not only for transcription initiation but also for subsequent phosphorylation of Pol II to ensure the proper establishment of pausing. Transient promoter melting by the helicase module of TFIIH. The TFIIH holoenzyme is organized into two structurally and functionally distinct subcomplexes: the core module and the CDK-​activating kinase (CAK) module (reviewed in ref.74). The catalytic subunit in the core module is the ATP-​dependent 3′ to 5′ helicase XPB (Ssl2 in budding yeast), which opens the dsDNA (promoter melting) to allow Pol II access to the template strand, which is referred to as open complex formation75 (Fig. 1a). Permanganate can react with the

[Page 4]

a Initiation and pausing establishment CTD

Mediator

TFIIF

CDK7 GTFs TFIIH XPB

CTD Ser5 phosphorylation CTD Ser2 phosphorylation NELF phosphorylation DSIF phosphorylation

Pol II

b Pausing stabilization

Mediator

–1

DSIF NELF PAF1C

TFIIF Gdown1

+1

NEL NELF

Pol II Transcript

DSIF SEC

PAF1C

Gdown1

+1

–1

c Release from pausing

DSIF NELF PAF1C SEC

–1

+1

Fig. 1 | Establishment, maintenance and release of RNA polymerase II pausing. a | General transcription factors (GTFs) recruit RNA polymerase II (Pol II) to the promoter to form the preinitiation complex. One GTF, TFIIH, has a dual role in helping to open the double-​stranded DNA through the helicase subunit xeroderma pigmentosum group B-​ complementing protein (XPB) to allow Pol II to initiate transcription, and in establishing pausing by phosphorylating the Ser5 residues of the Pol II carboxy-​terminal domain (CTD) through its cyclin-​dependent kinase 7 (CDK7) subunit. The Mediator complex enables the formation of long-​range enhancer–promoter interactions; the GTF TFIIF has dual roles in promoting transcription initiation and early elongation. b | Paused Pol II is stabilized by interacting with several pausing factors, such as negative elongation factor (NELF), DRB sensitivity-​inducing factor (DSIF), Pol II-​associated factor 1 complex (PAF1C) and Gdown1. Depletion of NELF (top) results in Pol II destabilization before it passes through the +1 nucleosome downstream of the transcription start site and in promoter-​proximal transcription termination. PAF1C depletion (bottom) leads to increased recruitment of the super elongation complex (SEC), which results in the release of paused Pol II into productive elongation. Gdown1 contributes to pausing by blocking recruitment of TFIIF. c | Release from pausing is driven by the recruitment and activation of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-​TEFb)-containing complexes, for example, the SEC, which phosphorylates NELF, DSIF and Ser2 residues of the Pol II CTD. Phosphorylated NELF dissociates from chromatin, whereas PAF1C and phosphorylated DSIF transition from being pausing factors to being positive elongation factors by promoting Pol II processivity and contributing to co-​transcriptional RNA processing (not shown).

single-​stranded DNA and has been used to demonstrate that Pol II rapidly proceeds from the site of open complex formation to the site of pausing1,21,76. The promoter melting activity of XPB is required for each new round of transcription initiation76. Treatment of cells with the XPB inhibitor triptolide blocks new initiation, thereby allowing the decoupling of the study of transcription elongation and Pol II pausing from that of transcription initiation5,27,28,32.

The kinase module of TFIIH prepares Pol II for pausing. The CAK module of TFIIH contains CDK7 (Kin28 in budding yeast), which phosphorylates the Ser5 and Ser7 residues of the Pol II carboxy-​terminal domain (CTD)77,78. Ser5 phosphorylation is the much more studied of the two modifications; it is known to occur during transcription initiation and to gradually undergo dephosphorylation as Pol II enters productive elongation79 (Fig. 1). Therefore, Ser5 phosphorylation is

[Page 5]

Mediator complex A large multiprotein complex that interacts with transcription factors and RNA polymerase II. Mediator can promote enhancer–promoter looping to activate transcription and can also recruit transcription elongation factors.

Auxin-​inducible degradation In cells expressing a plant auxin-​inducible E3 ubiquitin ligase, any protein of interest can be tagged for rapid degraded upon addition of auxin to the medium.

commonly used as a mark of paused Pol II to distinguish it from unphosphorylated or non-​transcriptionally engaged Pol II. TFIIH recruitment requires CDK8, which is the kinase module of the Mediator complex. Once phosphorylated, TFIIH evicts the Mediator through CDK7mediated phosphorylation of Ser5 of the Pol II CTD and thus allows the release of Pol II from the PIC80,81. In budding yeast, a direct role for Ser5 phosphorylation in this process was suggested by replacing wild-​type RNA poly merase II subunit 1 (Rpb1) with Rpb1 bearing a CTD-​ S5A mutant that cannot be phosphorylated by CDK7. The CTD-​S5A mutant mimics chemical inhibition of CDK7, with both the CTD mutant and CDK7 inhibition resulting in the accumulation of Mediator at core promoters and impaired escape of Pol II from the PIC82. Pol II CTD Ser5 phosphorylation also helps to recruit and activate the capping enzymes83 that carry out a multistep modification of the 5′ end of the nascent RNA. Sequencing of small capped RNAs indicated that co-​transcriptional capping is important for the stability of paused Pol II (ref.28). Uncapped RNAs are subject to degradation by nucleases such as 5′-3′ exoribonuclease 2 (XRN2), which can mediate the termination of promoter-​ proximal Pol II pausing, suggesting that decapping factors are prime regulators of the residency time of paused Pol II (ref.84). This idea is supported by studies employing CDK7 inhibition, otherwise inhibiting Ser5 phosphorylation or blocking nascent RNA capping, which led to defective establishment of pausing77,85–87. Additionally, phosphorylation of Ser5 stimulates the catalytic activity of the histone-​lysine N-​methyltransferase SETD1A and thus helps maintain at promoters the levels of trimethylation of histone H3 Lys 4 (H3K4me3), which are associated with transcription activation86. The precise location of pausing downstream of the TSS, which can vary between 20 and 120 nucleotides, could be governed in part by the speed of Pol II escaping from initiation and how quickly pausing factors are recruited to it76. However, extending the distance between the HSP70 TSS and the normal site of pausing by inserting a 5 bp linker led to a concomitant shift downstream in the site of Pol II, whereas a 10 bp insertion led to a much more distal and less focused site of pausing, suggesting that additional mechanisms control the distance between the TSS and the pause site47.

Maintenance of Pol II pausing Maintencance of Pol II pausing appears to be controlled by different factors that regulate distinct features of the transcriptionally engaged Pol II. Current evidence indicates that maintaining Pol II pausing requires both factors that prevent promoter-​proximal transcription termination and factors that prevent the release of Pol II into productive elongation (Fig. 1b).

to the Pol II CTD, the carboxy-​terminal region (CTR) of SPT5 has a repeat region (in this case a pentapeptide repeat) that is phosphorylated by both the kinase module of TFIIH and by P-​TEFb and is involved in the recruitment and activation of the capping complex91–94. Biochemical and structural studies demonstrated that SPT5 makes key contacts with the nascent RNA exiting Pol II, which could contribute to its role in pausing95–97. NELF is a four-​subunit complex, in which NELF-​A and NELF-​C (or its isoform NELF-​D) form the core sub-​complex, which associates with NELF-​B and NELF-​ E98 (Table 1). In the presence of DSIF, NELF is a potent inhibitor of transcription in vitro88. However, depleting NELF in cells generally leads to decreased levels of promoter-​proximal Pol II and reduced transcription at many paused genes99–101. One way to reconcile the findings from in vitro transcription studies and from NELF depletion studies is if NELF stabilizes paused Pol II by preventing premature promoter-​proximal transcription termination, a process whereby Pol II dissociates from promoters without passing through the +1 nucleosomes28,29 (Fig. 1b). All four subunits of NELF can associate with RNA, raising the possibility that NELF interactions with short nascent RNA could contribute to the inhibition of premature transcription termination98,102,103. Studies of NELF function in cells have been performed with either depletion or deletion of its subunits and monitoring of Pol II pausing following a long period of selection, which could include many indirect effects of NELF loss. Therefore, future studies of NELF and its role in pausing should concentrate on the in vivo role or roles of NELF in pausing immediately following NELF loss, as the in vitro conditions that led to current models of NELF function could be missing many factors that regulate NELF activity. The Pol II subunit Gdown1 (also known as GRINL1A) also appears to regulate pausing through preventing promoter-​proximal transcription termination. Gdown1 competes for binding to Pol II with TFIIF, which is a GTF that boosts both transcription initiation and early elongation89,104–109 (Fig. 1b; Table 1). Gdown1 also inhibits transcription termination factor 2 (TTF2). Therefore, Gdown1 may contribute to pausing by blocking recruitment of TFIIF and by inhibiting early transcription termination. Further in vivo studies of the roles of Gdown1 in transcription regulation would be highly informative.

Maintaining Pol II pausing by preventing Pol II release. DSIF, NELF and Gdown1 were each implicated in pausing using in vitro transcription systems, and their depletion in cells leads to decreased transcription. By contrast, the PAF1 complex (PAF1C), which had been shown to promote transcription elongation using in vitro transcription systems110,111, was genetically implicated in antagonizing the release of paused Maintaining Pol II pausing by preventing promoter-​ Pol II at erythroid genes in zebrafish112. To address proximal transcription termination. Studies of tran- this discrepancy, genome-​wide studies in mammal scription elongation in vitro have found that two ian cells found that depleting PAF1 by RNAi or by complexes, DSIF and NELF, are required for transcrip- auxin-​inducible degradation generally leads to the release of tion inhibition by DRB88–90. DSIF is composed of tran- Pol II into gene bodies and increased levels of mature scription elongation factors SPT4 and SPT5. Similar transcripts at paused genes, which is in agreement

[Page 6]

Acute protein degradation Experimentally induced degradation of proteins by targeting them for proteasomal degradation.

with the result of the genetic studies of PAF1C25,113,114 (Fig. 1b). Genes with higher pausing indices were more likely to exhibit pause release upon PAF1 depletion, but the basis of this gene specificity is not yet fully understood. Perhaps interactions with particular transcription

a 7SK–P-TEFb complex

CTD Ser5 phosphorylation CTD Ser2 phosphorylation Histone acetylaton

P-TEFb

HEXIM1 or LARP7 HEXIM2 MEPCE 7SK RNA

b BRD4–P-TEFb complex CTD P-TEFb

BRD4

c SEC and SEC-like complexes Target genes of SEC EAF1 or ELL2 EAF2 AFF1 or AFF4 P-TEFb AF9 or ENL Pol II Target genes of SEC-like complexes AFF2 or P-TEFb AFF3 AF9 or ENL Pol II

Fig. 2 | Release of RNA polymerase II pausing by P-​TEFb-containing complexes. Three major positive transcription elongation factor b (P-​TEFb)-containing complexes have been identified in mammals: 7SK small nuclear ribonucleoprotein–P-​TEFb (7SK–P-TEFb), bromodomain-​containing protein 4–P-​TEFb (BRD4–P-​TEFb) and the super elongation complex (SEC) or SEC-​like complexes. a | 7SK–P-​TEFb inhibits the activity of P-​TEFb and thus suppresses the release of paused RNA polymerase II (Pol II). The complex contains the non-​coding 7SK small nuclear RNA (snRNA), which interacts with and is stabilized by La-​related protein 7 (LARP7) and 7SK snRNA methyl phosphate capping enzyme (MEPCE), and HEXIM1 or HEXIM2, which mediate the inhibition of P-​TEFb by binding and sequestering it. b | In the BRD4–P-​TEFb complex, BRD4 stimulates the kinase activity of P-​TEFb, which phosphorylates the Ser2 residues of the Pol II carboxy-​terminal domain (CTD) and thus promotes the release of paused Pol II. The interaction between BRD4 and P-​TEFb is mediated by a carboxy-​terminal region of BRD4 (not shown). The bromodomains of BRD4 recognize acetylated histones and mediate BRD4 recruitment. c | The SEC seems to be the most active P-​TEFb complex because it is required for the expression of rapidly induced genes. SEC assembly relies on the scaffold protein AF4/FMR2 family member 1 (AFF1) or AFF4, which interacts with P-​TEFb and with ALL1-fused gene from chromosome 9 protein (AF9) or eleven-​nineteen leukaemia (ENL) and with eleven-​nineteen lysine-​rich leukaemia protein 2 (ELL2). ELL-​associated factor 1 (EAF1) or EAF2 participate in the SEC through binding directly to ELL2. AF9 and ENL recognize acetylated histones to facilitate SEC recruitment, and ELL2 promotes transcription elongation by suppressing transient Pol II pausing (not shown). The SEC-​like complexes are composed of AFF2 or AFF3, P-​TEFb, and AF9 or ENL, but lack ELL2–EAF modules. The SEC and the SEC-​like complexes might stimulate transcription activation of different target genes.

factors at distinct stages of transcription could determine whether PAF1 functions as a positive or negative regulator of gene expression115. The recent finding that PAF1 occupies and inhibits the activity of enhancers associated with genes regulated by PAF1 is consistent with the idea that transcription factors or other enhancer-​binding factors function with PAF1 in the regulation of pausing113. As discussed below, although PAF1 generally inhibits enhancer activity and the release of promoter-​proximal paused Pol II, PAF1 can function as a positive trans cription elongation factor following the release of Pol II from pausing (Fig. 1c). Together, these studies have revealed that Pol II pausing is subjected to complex and multilayered regulation by a cohort of pausing factors. However, a full understanding of the detailed interplay among these factors on a genome-​wide scale is still missing. Accordingly, further investigation is warranted to systematically compare different pausing factors in the same genetic and epigenetic backgrounds using not only RNAi but also acute protein degradation to determine their direct gene targets and their primary roles in maintaining Pol II pausing.

Promoting the release of paused Pol II The release of Pol II into productive elongation requires the activity of the Pol II CTD kinase P-​TEFb4. The mechanism of release is thought to involve not only phosphorylation of the Pol II CTD Ser2 residues but also phosphorylation of DSIF and NELF. P-​TEFb is part of macromolecular complexes, including the SEC, which regulate its activity (Fig. 1c). P-​TEFb was discovered as a complex that allows Pol II to efficiently synthesize long transcripts in a DRB-​ sensitive manner14,116. Treatment of cells with DRB or other P-​TEFb inhibitors leads to a global defect in the release of paused Pol II and a reduction in steady-​state levels of transcripts3,5,117, demonstrating the essential role of P-​TEFb in mediating Pol II release and its requirement for transcription of most Pol II-​transcribed genes. Well-​known substrates of P-​TEFb include NELF, DSIF and the CTD of Pol II (refs118–121). NELF dissociates from chromatin upon its phosphorylation by P-​TEFb118,122, whereas DSIF switches from being a pausing factor to being a positive elongation factor upon P-​TEFb phosphorylation of the SPT5 CTR119,123 (Fig. 1c). Several P-​TEFb complexes control Pol II release from pausing. Biochemical studies have shown that P-​TEFb is part of several larger complexes by associating with 7SK snRNP, BRD4 and the SEC7–11,124,125 (Fig. 2). 7SK snRNP represses transcription by sequestering and inhibiting a large portion of cellular P-​TEFb10,11. This inhibition is mediated through the binding of P-​TEFb by a dimer of HEXIM1 or HEXIM2 (ref.126) (Fig. 2a). Up to 90% of P-​ TEFb is sequestered with the 7SK-​P-TEFb complex127. By contrast, the SEC and BRD4 represent active forms of P-​TEFb that can promote the release of Pol II from pausing6,9,128 (Fig. 2b,c). During gene activation, especially rapid transcription induction, P-​TEFb is evicted from 7SK snRNP127 and can incorporate into the SEC, which leads to the enzymatic activation of P-​TEFb, which then

[Page 7]

Integrator complex A large multiprotein complex found only in metazoans that can directly interact with RNA polymerase II; facilitates transcription and 3′-end processing of enhancer RNAs and small nuclear RNAs and recruitment of the super elongation complex to immediate early-​response genes.

Nucleosome breathing A property of nucleosomes whereby DNA at the edges of the histone core transiently unwrap and rewrap.

phosphorylates its targets, including the Ser2 residues of the Pol II CTD125,127–129. The transition of P-​TEFb from repressive to active complexes depends on multiple factors, including KRAB-​associated protein 1 (KAP1; also known as TRIM28) and the splicing factors serine/ arginine-​rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1) and SRSF2, which associate with 7SK snRNP on chromatin130,131. Although both BRD4–P-​TEFb and the SEC phosphorylate Ser2 residues of the Pol II CTD, it remains to be determined how the two complexes work together (or separately), to promote transcription elongation. Intriguingly, a recent study reported that acute degradation of BRD4 resulted in a severe defect in Ser2 phosphorylation and transcription elongation without obvious change in the genomic occupancy of the P-​TEFb catalytic subunit CDK9 (ref.132). This suggests that BRD4 is primarily involved in stimulating, but not recruiting, P-​TEFb or that BRD4 can function independently of P-​ TEFb133. Indeed, it has been reported that BRD4 is also an (atypical) kinase that can phosphorylate Ser2 of CTD in vitro134 and can facilitate transcription elongation independently of P-​TEFb135. Previous work on HIV activation indicates that BRD4 maintains basal transcription from the HIV long terminal repeat (LTR), whereas transactivator of transcription (TAT)-mediated recruitment of the SEC to the HIV LTR is required for full activation of the provirus transcription136,137. Interestingly, TAT interacts with P-​ TEFb, specifically comprising the cyclin T1 isoform through zinc-​dependent binding to a Cys residue that is not found in cyclin T2 (ref.138). However, the degree to which cellular genes depend on cyclin T1 versus cyclin T2 is currently unknown. SEC subunits are frequently found with translocation partners of the histone H3 Lys4 methyltransferase myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage leukaemia (MLL; also known as KMT2A) in cancer139. Although mechanisms have been proposed for SEC recruitment to MLL target genes through its interactions with MLL fusion proteins in cancer and for the co-​option of the SEC by TAT for HIV transcription139,140, it is less clear how the SEC is recruited to chromatin in normal physiological conditions. One possibility is that tissue-​specific transcription factors, such as the Notch pathway effector HES1, bind and recruit the SEC to activate their transcription programmes141. At epidermal growth factor target genes such as FOS and JUN, the SEC is recruited by the Integrator complex142. Another, nonexclusive possibility is that the SEC recognizes certain chromatin profiles. For instance, the YEATS (YAF9, ENL, AF9, TAF14 and SAS5) domains of the SEC subunits eleven-​nineteen leukaemia (ENL) and ALL1-fused gene from chromosome 9 protein (AF9), which are frequent translocation partners of MLL, can bind acetylated H3 and are required for recruiting the SEC to chromatin and driving high levels of transcription in acute myeloid leukaemia and of HIV provirus143–146. Metazoan-​specific Mediator complex subunit 26 (MED26) has been suggested to contribute to SEC recruit ment through its interaction with the SEC subunits ELL-​ associated factor 1 (EAF1) and EAF2 (refs147,148). However, EAF1 and EAF2 are also part of a distinct transcription

elongation complex named the little elongation complex (LEC), which regulates Pol II transcription of small nuclear RNA (snRNA) genes, suggesting that additional factors could specify the recruitment of LEC to snRNA genes and of the SEC to protein-​coding and long non-​ coding RNA genes147,149–151. The use of auxin-​inducible degradation of MED26 and other Mediator subunits should allow further dissection of their suggested contribution to SEC recruitment and other possible roles in transcription elongation control. Notably, SEC recruitment would be present at most genes actively transcribed by Pol II. In mammals, AF4/FMR2 family member 1 (AFF1) and AFF4, which are the scaffolding proteins of the canonical SEC, have two additional paralogues, AFF2 and AFF3. AFF2 and AFF3 can each be assembled into active P-​TEFb-containing and ENL-​containing SEC-​like complexes, and affect the expression of distinct groups of genes compared with those affected by the full SEC6 (Fig. 2c). This suggests that generic recruitment to actively transcribed genes is not sufficient to explain the unique function of the SEC.

Productive transcription elongation Productive elongation by Pol II affects and is also affected by chromatin structure through both nucleo some turnover and co-​transcriptional modification of histones and DNA. A chromatin structure that allows polymerases to move forward while preventing cryptic intragenic transcription initiation requires factors that balance the disassembly and reassembly of nucleosomes (reviewed in refs152–154). At the 3′ end of genes, elongating Pol II transitions into transcription termination, which involves RNA cleavage and polyadenylation (Box 1). Nucleosome turnover during transcription elong ation. The dynamic turnover of nucleosomes during elongation is mainly driven by the activity of chromatin remodellers and histone chaperones, which facilitate the movement of Pol II through nucleosomes and aid in their reassembly. The histone octamer of a nucleosome has a tripartite arrangement of one H3–H4 tetramer and two H2A–H2B dimers155. During transcription by Pol II, one H2A–H2B dimer is removed from the nucleosome, leaving a subnucleosomal particle called the hexasome156. This process can be enhanced by facilitates chromatin transcription (FACT), which travels with Pol II, interacts directly with the H2A–H2B dimer and regu lates transcription-​couple disassembly and reassembly of nucleosomes157–159. Dislodgement of H2A–H2B dimers by FACT can enhance nucleosome breathing to facilitate the passage of Pol II (refs160,161). The dynamic regulation of nucleosomes during transcription elong ation by FACT can be further facilitated by other histone chaperones and chromatin remodellers, such as SPT6, chromodomain-​helicase-DNA-​binding protein 1 (CHD1) and imitation SWI (ISWI)162,163. Factors implicated in the regulation of pausing can also facilitate transcription elongation through chromatin. For example, after release of Pol II into productive elongation, PAF1C travels with the elongating Pol II and acts as an organizing platform for co-​transcriptional

[Page 8]

Box 1 | Ending transcription elongation by termination The transition from transcription elongation to Polyadenylation CTD R1810me2s transcription termination requires expulsion of signal CTD Ser2 phosphorylation elongating RNA polymerase II (Pol II) from chromatin DNA at the end of the gene. This process is coordinated with RNA cleavage and polyadenylation, which are XRN2 mediated by various protein complexes, including the SMN cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF) DSIF Senataxin AAU and the cleavage stimulation factor (CSTF) (reviewed CTD PAF1C 259,260 ). Two different but not mutually exclusive in refs R-loop Transcript models for Pol II transcription termination have been CPSF Pol II debated for decades, namely, the torpedo model and CSTF the allosteric model. The torpedo model posits that cleavage of the nascent transcript allows access to 5′-3′ exoribonuclease 2 (XRN2), which chases down and promotes the eviction of Pol II. The allosteric model posits that a poly(A) signal-​dependent conformational change of Pol II at the end of genes triggers termination and dislodges Pol II from chromatin. Two recent studies, one advocating for the torpedo model261 and the other for the allosteric model262, reported decreased, but not abolished, termination by XRN2 inhibition261,262, implying that RNA degradation following cleavage might contribute to efficient transcription termination but that it is not absolutely required for termination at most genes263. Transcription termination of many genes is associated with Pol II pausing downstream of the poly(A) site (reviewed in refs259,260), which is thought to favour the cleavage of transcripts and degradation of the downstream cleaved RNA. Indeed, reduction of 3′-end Pol II pausing by inhibition of positive transcription elongation factor b (P-​TEFb) leads to decreased cleavage and termination264,265. Similar to the proposed role of R-​loops in promoter-​proximal pausing regulation, pausing at the 3′ end could be enhanced by R-​loop formation downstream of the poly(A) site (see the figure) and could be further enhanced by RNAi-​induced formation of repressive chromatin36,266. R-​loops at the 3′ end of genes are resolved by senataxin, which facilitates degradation of transcripts downstream of poly(A) by XRN2 (ref.267) (see the figure). A recent study suggests that senataxin is recruited to termination sites by its interaction with survival of motor neuron protein (SMN), which recognizes symmetrical dimethylation of Arg1810 (R1810me2s) on the carboxy-​terminal domain (CTD) of Pol II (ref.268). DSIF, DRB sensitivity-​inducing factor; PAF1C, Pol II-​associated factor 1 complex.

processes by recruiting a variety of nucleosome remodellers (CHD1 (ref. 164) ), histone chaperones (SPT6 (ref.165) and FACT166,167) and histone modifiers (complex proteins associated with SET1 (COMPASS)168, E3 ubiquitin-​protein ligase BRE1169,170 and histone-​lysine N-​methyltransferase, H3K79 specific (also known as DOT1L)168,169. Therefore, defects in productive elong ation owing to PAF1C ablation could result from the deregulation of any number of these factors. As another example, DSIF transits from being a pausing factor to an elongation factor upon phosphorylation by P-​TEFb. Upon the release of Pol II pausing, DSIF promotes productive elongation by interacting with elongating Pol II and reinforcing the closed conformation of the Pol II clamp to facilitate the passage of the template DNA through the central cleft of the polymerase92,171–173.

Pol II clamp Part of the RNA polymerase II (Pol II) complex comprising the amino-​terminal regions of RNA Pol II subunit 1 (Rpb1) and Rpb2, and the carboxy-​ terminal region of Rpb6, which swings over the Pol II active-​site cleft to encase the DNA template and nascent RNA.

The chromatin landscape of productive elongation. A variety of post-​translational modifications are associated with distinct stages of transcription. Active promoters possess high levels of H3K4me3 and multiple acetylated H3 and H4 Lys residues, whereas gene bodies of transcribed genes are enriched with mono-​ ubiquitylated H2B (H2Bub), H3K36me3, H3K79me2 and H3K79me3 (refs174–176) (Fig. 3). However, owing to the high correlation of all these histone modifications with gene expression and their complex crosstalk177,178, it has been challenging to discriminate the direct involvement of each modification in transcription regulation. In budding and fission yeasts, the deposition of H2Bub by the E3 ubiquitin ligase Bre1 is regulated by chromatin remodelling factor Chd1,

but perturbation of its deposition has a minor effect on gene expression179–181. Studies in mammalian cells have identified a role for regulators of H2B ubiquitylation in regulating transcription at both enhancers and promoters, but no direct role in promoting transcription elongation has been identified182,183. Histone-​lysine N-​methyltransferase SETD2 associates with the phosphorylated Pol II CTD and deposits H3K36me3 in gene bodies, where it can affect RNA splicing and prevent cryptic transcription154,184 (Fig. 3c). This regulation is mediated by a variety of factors that can recognize H3K36me3, such as histone deacetylases and nucleosome remodellers185,186. In mammals, SETD2catalysed H3K36me3 is recognized by the PWWP domain of DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 3B, which methylates DNA in gene bodies to help prevent cryptic transcription187,188. Histone H3K79me2 and H3K79me3 are found in gene bodies of actively transcribed genes, but the function of these modifications is not well understood (Fig. 3c). The methylation of H3K79 is mediated by DOT1L with the assistance of PAF1 and BRE1 (refs168,189–192). In metazoans, DOT1L associates with the SEC proteins AF9 and ENL, suggesting that DOT1L and the SEC share some degree of co-​regulation193. The catalytic domain of DOT1 is structurally unrelated to the SET domain found in other Lys methyltransferases, and the Lys that it modifies is located in the globular domain of H3, not in its tail194. No domains that recognize H3K79me or any demethylases for these residues have been identified, further hampering investigation of the role of H3K79me in transcription elongation.

[Page 9]

Enhancers regulate elongation Enhancer–promoter interactions are essential for finetuning transcription, including transcription elong ation22,195 (reviewed in refs196,197). Although the topological organization of long-​range enhancer–promoter interactions is not fully understood, the cohesin and Mediator complexes have important roles in enabling these interactions198–200. Cohesin and Mediator physi cally interact with each other and co-​o ccupy both active enhancers and promoters199,200. Cohesin forms a ring-​like structure that is thought to hold together the enhancer and promoter198 (Fig. 4). However, cohesin depletion predominantly affects the release of paused Pol II rather than the establishment of pausing201,202, suggesting that enhancer–promoter looping directly governs

Cornelia de Lange syndrome A developmental syndrome caused by heterozygous germline loss-​of-function mutations in the cohesin loading protein nipped-​B-like protein or in structural components of the cohesin ring.

CHOPS syndrome A developmental syndrome with a similar phenotype to Cornelia de Lange syndrome that is caused by germline gain-​ of-function mutations in the super elongation complex scaffolding protein AF4/FMR2 family member 4.

Enhancer

TSS

TTS

Total Pol II Ser5P Ser2P

H3K4me1 H3K4me2 H3K4me3

H3K27ac H2Bub H3K36me3 H3K79me3

Fig. 3 | Post-​translational modification of RNA polymerase II and histones at active genes with pausing and at active enhancers. a | Average chromatin occupancy profiles of total RNA polymerase II (Pol II), Pol II with carboxy-​terminal domain (CTD) phosphorylated at Ser5 (Ser5P) and at Ser2 (Ser2P) on active genes that exhibit Pol II pausing and at active enhancers. In general, the occupancy of Pol II is higher at promoters than at enhancers. Ser5P levels are enriched at promoter regions, whereas Ser2P levels increase along the gene bodies. b | Average profiles of histone H3 Lys4 (H3K4) methylation on active genes and enhancers. On active genes, trimethylation of H3K4 (H3K4me3) localizes around the transcription start site (TSS) and is surrounded by H3K4me2; H3K4me1 extends furthest into gene bodies. Enhancers are generally enriched in H3K4me1. c | Average profiles of acetylation of H3K27 (H3K27ac), mono-​ ubiquitylation of H2B (H2Bub), H3K36me3 and H3K79me3 on active genes and enhancers. H3K27ac peaks at active enhancers and promoters of active genes. By contrast, H2Bub, H3K36me3 and H3K79me3 levels are highest in gene bodies. The level of H3K79me3 is relatively higher towards the 5′ end of gene bodies, and H3K36me3 is enriched towards the 3′ end of genes. H2Bub is more evenly distributed across gene bodies. TTS, transcription termination site.

transcription elongation. Heterozygous mutations in cohesin subunits cause Cornelia de Lange syndrome, probably owing to defective enhancer–promoter communication and not the chromosome cohesion role of cohesin203. Mutations that stabilize the SEC core component AFF4 were found in patients with CHOPS syndrome, which shares many phenotypic properties with Cornelia de Lange syndrome204. The similarities in phenotypes between loss of function of cohesin and gain of function of the SEC raise the possibility that cohesin-​dependent enhancer activity modulates the role of the SEC in transcription elongation. There are at least two lines of evidence that link Mediator to transcription elongation control in addition to its interaction with cohesin80. First, Mediator alleviates the Gdown1-dependent stabilization of Pol II pausing106,205, and second, Mediator appears to recruit the SEC and BRD4 to promoter regions and thus stimulates Pol II release147,206,207. Owing to the transient association of Mediator with PIC before the full establishment of pausing as discussed above, the SEC and BRD4, which are recruited early during that short time frame by Mediator, must be retained on chromatin through additional mechanisms, for example, through their binding to acetylated histones. Active enhancers are enriched in H3K4me1 and in acetylated H3K27 (H3K27ac) (Fig. 3), which are largely catalysed by the COMPASS family members myeloid/ lymphoid or mixed-​lineage leukaemia protein 3 (MLL3; also known as KMT2C) and MLL4 (also known as KMT2D)208,209 and by p300 and CREB-​binding protein (CREBBP)210,211, respectively (Fig. 4). In contrast to H3K4me1, which is present at both active and poised enhancers, the presence of H3K27ac correlates with enhancer activity139,211,212. Enhancer RNAs were suggested to interact with and facilitate the eviction of NELF from promoters to activate the release of paused Pol II (ref.103), providing a potential direct link between enhancer activation and transcription elongation. Recent work has suggested that components of all three P-​TEFb-containing complexes bind to enhancers and regulate their activity: the snRNA in the inactive 7SK–P-​TEFb complex interacts with a chromatin remodelling complex to inhibit enhancer RNA transcription 213, whereas BRD4–P-​ TEFb and the SEC promote enhancer activation135,214–216 (Table 1). PAF1 occupies enhancers and can restrict the hyperactivation of a subset of them113. Increased enhancer activity upon PAF1 depletion correlates with release from pausing of nearby genes. Furthermore, deletion of PAF1regulated enhancers resulted in loss of pause–release at their cognate genes without greatly affecting transcription initiation113. The concordant change of enhancer activation and Pol II release without increasing rates of initiation reinforces the notion that enhancers contribute directly to the elongation process.

Multitasking factors control elongation Recent studies identified various regulators of transcription elongation that have known roles in other cellular processes, including factors previously implicated in DNA replication and the DNA damage response. These factors modulate signal-​induced transcription or directly perturb the interplay between the transcription machinery and chromatin. Here, we discuss recent progress in

[Page 10]

Lowly active or inactive enhancers

PAF1C Pol II NURD

MLL3–COMPASS or MLL4–COMPASS

DSIF

NELF

Gdown1

–1 Transcript +1 Signal-induced Promoter-proximal gene expression pausing through enhancer activation

CTD Ser5 phosphorylation CTD Ser2 phosphorylation DSIF phosphorylation H3K4me1 H3K4me3 H3K27ac H4 acetylation

Highly active enhancers SEC eRNA Cohesin

MLL3–COMPASS or MLL4–COMPASS

BRD4

p300 and CBP

Mediator

+1

–1

Release of Pol II from promoter-proximal pausing

Fig. 4 | Regulation of transcription elongation by enhancers. Lowly active or inactive enhancers are marked by the presence of monomethylated histone H3 Lys4 (H3K4me1), which is catalysed by myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-​lineage leukaemia protein 3 (MLL3)-containing or MLL4-containing complex of proteins associated with SET1 (COMPASS), with or without low levels of acetylated H3K27 (H3K27ac), which is catalysed by p300 or CREB-​binding protein (CBP). RNA polymerase II (Pol II)-associated factor 1 complex (PAF1C) and the nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase (NURD) complex can bind less active enhancers and prevent their activation and transcription of enhancer RNAs (eRNAs). Genes neighbouring the less active enhancers tend to exhibit higher levels of pausing. Following signalling cues, p300, CBP and H4 acetyltransferases (not shown) are recruited to enhancers by transcription factors (not shown) to catalyse histone acetylation at enhancers and promoters. Activation of enhancers is often associated with the production of eRNAs. The physical interaction between enhancers and promoters requires cohesin and Mediator complexes. The increased level of histone acetylation contributes to the binding of bromodomain-​containing protein 4 (BRD4) and the super elongation complex (SEC) to chromatin through their bromodomains and YEATS (YAF9, ENL, AF9, TAF14 and SAS5) domains, respectively. BRD4-containing and SEC-​containing positive transcription elongation factor b (P-​TEFb) phosphorylate negative elongation factor (NELF), DRB sensitivity-​inducing factor (DSIF) and Ser2 residues of the Pol II carboxy-​terminal domain (CTD), which releases the paused Pol II into productive transcription elongation.

understanding how topoisomerases and PARPs regulate transcription elongation. The role of topoisomerases in transcription elongation. Topoisomerases are enzymes capable of creating transient DNA breaks to alleviate DNA supercoiling and thus are essential for cellular processes that require access to chromatin (reviewed in ref.217). The progression of Pol II

during transcription introduces overwound DNA ahead of the polymerase and underwound DNA behind it, with the former impeding the processivity of the polymerase218. Notably, the formation of supercoiled structures around promoter regions could stabilize paused Pol II, and the activity of DNA topoisomerase IIβ (TOP2β) can promote the release of pausing219,220. TOP2β activity can introduce DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) at promoters of a subset of paused, neuronal-​stimulation early-​response genes and induces Pol II release and productive elongation221. Upon the relaxation of supercoils, TOP2β ligates the DSBs; this is facilitated by tyrosyl-​ DNA phosphodiesterase 2 (TDP2), which hydrolyses the phosphotyrosyl bond between trapped topoisomerases and DNA222,223. In contrast to TOP2β, which is thought to be active around promoter regions, a recent study suggested that TOP1 is inactive at promoters but becomes fully activated by Pol II CTD phosphorylation and relieves torsional stress to promote efficient transcription elongation at gene bodies224. Intriguingly, only CTD phosphorylation induced by BRD4, but not P-​TEFb or TFIIH, is capable of stimulating the catalytic activity of TOP1 in vitro, suggesting that TOP1 activation by CTD phosphorylation is context-​dependent or conformation-​ dependent224. The activity of TOP1 can also be regulated through sumoylation by the protein inhibitor of activated STAT protein 1 (PIAS1) E3 ligase complex225. Consistent with a role of TOP1 in promoting productive elongation, previous work has shown that poisoning or depletion of TOP1 leads to more severe defects in transcription at longer genes226,227. Underwound DNA behind paused Pol II favours the opening of dsDNA and thus the formation of R-​ loops 228,229, which can promote Pol II pausing and inhibit productive elongation. Resolution of R-​loops to promote productive elongation has been described for ATP-​dependent DNA helicase Q5 (RECQ5), RNase H and the helicases senataxin and ATP-​dependent RNA helicase A (DHX9)230,231. RECQ5 is a general elongation factor that attenuates the movement of Pol II to minimize co-​transcriptional DNA instability232. Furthermore, RECQ5 induces PIAS1-catalysed sumoylation of TOP1 and thus enhances the recruitment of RNA splicing factors to actively transcribed genes225. TOP3β is the only known RNA topoisomerase in humans, but it is also active towards DNA233,234 and consequently can contribute to the resolution of R-​loops235. The recruitment of TOP3β to chromatin requires its interaction with Tudor domain-​containing protein 3 (TDRD3), which recognizes methylated histone H3 Arg235. Additionally, binding to TDRD3 facilitates substrate recognition by TOP3β and thus stimulates its activity in preventing R-​loop formation236,237. PARP1 ADP-​ribosylates transcription elongation factors. PARPs are a group of enzymes that catalyse the transfer of ADP-​ribose derived from NAD+ to target proteins. Aside from the well-​known function of PARPs in promoting DNA repair and thus maintaining genome stability238, numerous studies have implicated PARPs, especially PARP1, in regulating transcription

[Page 11]

MLL translocation in paediatric leukaemia Pause

MYC overexpressed in solid tumours

Go

regulation and the control of promoter-​proximal pausing, it will be important to investigate enhancer versus promoter-​proximal roles of PARP1 in the regulation of transcription elongation.

Concluding remarks Understanding the full extent of the regulation of tranFig. 5 | Cancer addiction into transcription elongation. The precise regulation of scription elongation at the level of both pause release and transcription elongation in physiological conditions is mediated by a cohort of processive elongation has been challenging owing to the elongation factors that modulate different steps of elongation through cooperative and intertwined processes during gene expression, including competitive mechanisms. Misregulated transcription elongation can be used to support transcription initiation, splicing and transcription teroncogenesis, as observed in paediatric leukaemia resulting from myeloid/lymphoid or mination. Although disrupting factors by depletion or mixed-​lineage leukaemia (MLL) translocations or in solid tumours driven by MYC deletion has been used as the major strategy to interro overexpression. Skewing the balance of transcription elongation control to higher rates gate the function of proteins or protein complexes in of Pol II pause–release and increased productive elongation leads to altered gene controlling transcription elongation, dissecting the expression and altered splicing, which is essential for oncogenic gene expression primary function of a factor in transcription regulation programmes. The regulation of this process can in turn provide therapeutic targets for human diseases that are caused by defects in transcription elongation control. will be greatly aided by the additional development of specific small molecule inhibitors of different steps of the transcription process. Also, the use of the auxin-​ elongation (Table 1). PARP1 can regulate transcription by inducible degradation system on factors involved in the decompacting chromatin through the ADP-​ribosylation process will allow the study of transcription immediately of histones and chromatin-​binding proteins, including following factor removal, which could distinguish inditranscription factors and remodellers in response to rect effects. Small molecule inhibitors are already availheat shock or signal transduction pathways (reviewed able for CDK7, CDK8 and CDK9, which enables the in refs239,240). ADP-​ribose on chromatin could also be selective targeting of the kinase modules of the TFIIH, converted into ATP and serve as a local source of energy Mediator and P-​TEFb complexes, respectively253–256. for chromatin remodelling to promote transcription241. More recently, protein depletion by auxin-​inducible A recent study using a chemical genetic approach degradation and phthalimide-​based acute degradation identified the NELF complex as one of the hundreds of has provided new insight into transcription elongation potential PARP1 substrates242,243. Consistent with PARP1 mechanisms113,132,144,173. regulation of transcription elongation, small molecule Disambiguating the various roles of multitasking inhibition of PARP1 or depletion of PARP1 increased the factors in transcription elongation from the other cellevels of paused Pol II at a subset of genes242. Moreover, lular processes in which they participate could be relePARP1 can be recruited by TOP2β to become activated vant for understanding human diseases. A recent study by TOP2β-​introduced DNA breaks to promote tran- used an in vivo functional screening strategy and idenscription activation220,244. In addition, PARP1 can ADP-​ tified numerous pausing and elongation factors that are ribosylate the FACT complex to promote its dissociation required for glioblastoma cell survival257. Mutations that from chromatin245,246. PARP1 also ADP-​r ibosylates stabilize the SEC, which is already known to be a cofactor enhancer-​binding factors247,248. For example, PARP1- of HIV TAT136,140 and the oncogenic MLL chimaeras139, catalysed ADP-​ribosylation of lysine-​specific demethyl lead to the developmental disorder CHOPS syndrome204. ase 5B (KDM5B), which demethylates H3K4me3 at both Therefore, progress in elucidating the molecular mechaenhancers and promoters249, prevents the interaction nisms underlying the regulation of transcription elong of KDM5B with chromatin and thus could affect the ation will not only contribute to our understanding of enhancer chromatin landscape248. the intricate control of gene expression programmes but Independent of its catalytic activity, PARP1 can pro- could also provide new therapeutic strategies for these mote binding of the pioneer transcription factor and and other diseases linked to transcription elongation pluripotency factor SOX2 to a subset of enhancers in factors. Given that devastating diseases, such as paediembryonic stem cells, whereas ADP-​ribosylation of atric blood cancers resulting from MLL translocations SOX2 promotes its degradation during differentia- or solid tumours driven by MYC overexpression, appear tion247,250. ADP-​ribosylation by PARP1 at enhancers to be diseases of uncontrolled transcription elongation, can serve as a platform to facilitate the recruitment of such molecular and biochemical studies could have a chromatin factors such as the nucleosome remodelling major therapeutic impact23,258 (Fig. 5). and deacetylase (NURD) complex during DNA damage repair251,252. Given the relationship between enhancer Published online 8 May 2018 1.

2.

Muse, G. W. et al. RNA polymerase is poised for activation across the genome. Nat. Genet. 39, Core, L. J., Waterfall, J. J. & Lis, J. T. Nascent RNA sequencing reveals widespread pausing and divergent initiation at human promoters. Science 322, This study introduces the method of global nuclear run-​on sequencing (GRO-​seq) that allows sensitive

3.

4.

detection of promoter-​proximal pausing and enhancer RNAs. Ni, Z. et al. P-​TEFb is critical for the maturation of RNA polymerase II into productive elongation in vivo. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 1161–1170 (2008). Peng, J., Marshall, N. F. & Price, D. H. Identification of a cyclin subunit required for the function of Drosophila P-​TEFb. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 13855–13860

5.

6.

Jonkers, I., Kwak, H. & Lis, J. T. Genome-​wide dynamics of Pol II elongation and its interplay with promoter proximal pausing, chromatin, and exons. eLife 3, e02407 (2014). Luo, Z. et al. The super elongation complex family of RNA polymerase II elongation factors: gene target specificity and transcriptional output. Mol. Cell. Biol. 32, 2608–2617

[Page 12]

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23. 24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Lin, C. et al. AFF4, a component of the ELL/P-​TEFb elongation complex and a shared subunit of MLL chimeras, can link transcription elongation to leukemia. Mol. Cell 37, 429–437 (2010). This study identifies the SEC, which contains translocation partners of the MLL gene in leukaemia. Yang, Z. et al. Recruitment of P-​TEFb for stimulation of transcriptional elongation by the bromodomain protein Brd4. Mol. Cell 19, 535–545 (2005). Jang, M. K. et al. The bromodomain protein Brd4 is a positive regulatory component of P-​TEFb and stimulates RNA polymerase II-​dependent transcription. Mol. Cell 19, 523–534 (2005). Yang, Z., Zhu, Q., Luo, K. & Zhou, Q. The 7SK small nuclear RNA inhibits the CDK9/cyclin T1 kinase to control transcription. Nature 414, 317–322 (2001). Nguyen, V. T., Kiss, T., Michels, A. A. & Bensaude, O. 7SK small nuclear RNA binds to and inhibits the activity of CDK9/cyclin T complexes. Nature 414, Herzel, L., Ottoz, D. S. M., Alpert, T. & Neugebauer, K. M. Splicing and transcription touch base: co-transcriptional spliceosome assembly and function. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 637–650 (2017). Shilatifard, A., Conaway, R. C. & Conaway, J. W. The RNA polymerase II elongation complex. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 72, 693–715 (2003). Marshall, N. F. & Price, D. H. Purification of P-​TEFb, a transcription factor required for the transition into productive elongation. J. Biol. Chem. 270, Shilatifard, A., Lane, W. S., Jackson, K. W., Conaway, R. C. & Conaway, J. W. An RNA polymerase II elongation factor encoded by the human ELL gene. Science 271, 1873–1876 (1996). This study implicates a bona fide transcriptional elongation factor as a driver of human cancer. Hartzog, G. A., Wada, T., Handa, H. & Winston, F. Evidence that Spt4, Spt5, and Spt6 control transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genes Dev. 12, 357–369 Wada, T. et al. DSIF, a novel transcription elongation factor that regulates RNA polymerase II processivity, is composed of human Spt4 and Spt5 homologs. Genes Dev. 12, 343–356 (1998). Gilmour, D. S. & Lis, J. T. RNA polymerase II interacts with the promoter region of the noninduced hsp70 gene in Drosophila melanogaster cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 6, 3984–3989 (1986). Rougvie, A. E. & Lis, J. T. The RNA polymerase II molecule at the 5′ end of the uninduced hsp70 gene of D. melanogaster is transcriptionally engaged. Cell 54, 795–804 (1988). Rougvie, A. E. & Lis, J. T. Postinitiation transcriptional control in Drosophila melanogaster. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 6041–6045 (1990). Zeitlinger, J. et al. RNA polymerase stalling at developmental control genes in the Drosophila melanogaster embryo. Nat. Genet. 39, 1512–1516 Krumm, A., Hickey, L. B. & Groudine, M. Promoter-​ proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II defines a general rate-​limiting step after transcription initiation. Genes Dev. 9, 559–572 (1995). Rahl, P. B. et al. c-​Myc regulates transcriptional pause release. Cell 141, 432–445 (2010). Reppas, N. B., Wade, J. T., Church, G. M. & Struhl, K. The transition between transcriptional initiation and elongation in E. coli is highly variable and often rate limiting. Mol. Cell 24, 747–757 (2006). Chen, F. X. et al. PAF1, a molecular regulator of promoter-​proximal pausing by RNA polymerase II. Cell 162, 1003–1015 (2015). This study identifies PAF1 as a pausing factor that prevents the release of paused Pol II into productive elongation. Titov, D. V. et al. XPB, a subunit of TFIIH, is a target of the natural product triptolide. Nat. Chem. Biol. 7, Chen, F., Gao, X. & Shilatifard, A. Stably paused genes revealed through inhibition of transcription initiation by the TFIIH inhibitor triptolide. Genes Dev. 29, Henriques, T. et al. Stable pausing by RNA polymerase II provides an opportunity to target and integrate regulatory signals. Mol. Cell 52, 517–528 (2013). Shao, W. & Zeitlinger, J. Paused RNA polymerase II inhibits new transcriptional initiation. Nat. Genet. 49, References 27–29 reveal the existence of genes with stably paused Pol II.

30. Nilson, K. A. et al. Oxidative stress rapidly stabilizes promoter-​proximal paused Pol II across the human genome. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 11088–11105 31. Day, D. S. et al. Comprehensive analysis of promoter-​proximal RNA polymerase II pausing across mammalian cell types. Genome Biol. 17, 120 32. Krebs, A. R. et al. Genome-​wide single-​molecule footprinting reveals high RNA polymerase II turnover at paused promoters. Mol. Cell 67, 411–422.e4 33. Lagha, M. et al. Paused Pol II coordinates tissue morphogenesis in the Drosophila embryo. Cell 153, 34. Hendrix, D. A., Hong, J. W., Zeitlinger, J., Rokhsar, D. S. & Levine, M. S. Promoter elements associated with RNA Pol II stalling in the Drosophila embryo. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 7762–7767 (2008). 35. Li, J. & Gilmour, D. S. Distinct mechanisms of transcriptional pausing orchestrated by GAGA factor and M1BP, a novel transcription factor. EMBO J. 32, 36. Ginno, P. A., Lim, Y. W., Lott, P. L., Korf, I. & Chedin, F. GC skew at the 5′ and 3′ ends of human genes links R-​loop formation to epigenetic regulation and transcription termination. Genome Res. 23, 37. Sanz, L. A. et al. Prevalent, dynamic, and conserved R-​Loop structures associate with specific epigenomic signatures in mammals. Mol. Cell 63, 167–178 38. Lesnik, E. A. & Freier, S. M. Relative thermodynamic stability of DNA, RNA, and DNA:RNA hybrid duplexes: relationship with base composition and structure. Biochemistry 34, 10807–10815 39. Tous, C. & Aguilera, A. Impairment of transcription elongation by R-​loops in vitro. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 360, 428–432 (2007). 40. Belotserkovskii, B. P., Soo Shin, J. H. & Hanawalt, P. C. Strong transcription blockage mediated by R-​loop formation within a G-​rich homopurine-​homopyrimidine sequence localized in the vicinity of the promoter. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 6589–6599 (2017). 41. Ratmeyer, L., Vinayak, R., Zhong, Y. Y., Zon, G. & Wilson, W. D. Sequence specific thermodynamic and structural properties for DNA. RNA duplexes. Biochemistry 33, 5298–5304 (1994). 42. Kellner, W. A., Bell, J. S. & Vertino, P. M. GC skew defines distinct RNA polymerase pause sites in CpG island promoters. Genome Res. 25, 1600–1609 43. Ginno, P. A., Lott, P. L., Christensen, H. C., Korf, I. & Chedin, F. R-​Loop formation is a distinctive characteristic of unmethylated human CpG island promoters. Mol. Cell 45, 814–825 (2012). 44. Lam, E. Y., Beraldi, D., Tannahill, D. & Balasubramanian, S. G-​Quadruplex structures are stable and detectable in human genomic DNA. Nat. Commun. 4, 1796 (2013). 45. Shrestha, P., Xiao, S., Dhakal, S., Tan, Z. & Mao, H. Nascent RNA transcripts facilitate the formation of G-​quadruplexes. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 7236–7246 46. Eddy, J. et al. G4 motifs correlate with promoter-​ proximal transcriptional pausing in human genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 4975–4983 (2011). 47. Kwak, H., Fuda, N. J., Core, L. J. & Lis, J. T. Precise maps of RNA polymerase reveal how promoters direct initiation and pausing. Science 339, 950–953 This study introduces precision run-​on and Ssquencing (PRO-​seq), which allows the mapping of engaged Pol II at base-​pair resolution. 48. Schones, D. E. et al. Dynamic regulation of nucleosome positioning in the human genome. Cell 132, 887–898 (2008). 49. Mavrich, T. N. et al. Nucleosome organization in the Drosophila genome. Nature 453, 358–362 50. Ozsolak, F., Song, J. S., Liu, X. S. & Fisher, D. E. High-​throughput mapping of the chromatin structure of human promoters. Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 244–248 51. Yuan, G. C. et al. Genome-​scale identification of nucleosome positions in S. cerevisiae. Science 309, 52. Booth, G. T., Wang, I. X., Cheung, V. G. & Lis, J. T. Divergence of a conserved elongation factor and transcription regulation in budding and fission yeast. Genome Res. 26, 799–811 (2016).

53. Steinmetz, E. J. et al. Genome-​wide distribution of yeast RNA polymerase II and its control by Sen1 helicase. Mol. Cell 24, 735–746 (2006). 54. Lee, C. K., Shibata, Y., Rao, B., Strahl, B. D. & Lieb, J. D. Evidence for nucleosome depletion at active regulatory regions genome-​wide. Nat. Genet. 36, 900–905 55. Tillo, D. & Hughes, T. R. G+C content dominates intrinsic nucleosome occupancy. BMC Bioinformatics 10, 442 (2009). 56. Valouev, A. et al. Determinants of nucleosome organization in primary human cells. Nature 474, 57. Gilchrist, D. A. et al. Pausing of RNA polymerase II disrupts DNA-​specified nucleosome organization to enable precise gene regulation. Cell 143, 540–551 This work reports that paused Pol II competes with nucleosomes for occupancy at paused promoters. 58. Fenouil, R. et al. CpG islands and GC content dictate nucleosome depletion in a transcription-​independent manner at mammalian promoters. Genome Res. 22, 59. de Dieuleveult, M. et al. Genome-​wide nucleosome specificity and function of chromatin remodellers in ES cells. Nature 530, 113–116 (2016). 60. Kubik, S. et al. Nucleosome stability distinguishes two different promoter types at all protein-​coding genes in yeast. Mol. Cell 60, 422–434 (2015). 61. Vera, D. L. et al. Differential nuclease sensitivity profiling of chromatin reveals biochemical footprints coupled to gene expression and functional DNA elements in maize. Plant Cell 26, 3883–3893 (2014). 62. Henikoff, S., Henikoff, J. G., Sakai, A., Loeb, G. B. & Ahmad, K. Genome-​wide profiling of salt fractions maps physical properties of chromatin. Genome Res. 19, 460–469 (2009). 63. Jin, C. et al. H3.3/H2A. Z double variant-​containing nucleosomes mark ‘nucleosome-​free regions’ of active promoters and other regulatory regions. Nat. Genet. 41, 941–945 (2009). 64. Ishii, H., Kadonaga, J. T. & Ren, B. MPE-​seq, a new method for the genome-​wide analysis of chromatin structure. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, E3457–E3465 (2015). 65. Mieczkowski, J. et al. MNase titration reveals differences between nucleosome occupancy and chromatin accessibility. Nat. Commun. 7, 11485 This study introduces a MNase titration-​based methodology to measure chromatin accessibility. 66. Xi, Y., Yao, J., Chen, R., Li, W. & He, X. Nucleosome fragility reveals novel functional states of chromatin and poises genes for activation. Genome Res. 21, 67. Chereji, R. V., Ocampo, J. & Clark, D. J. MNase-​ sensitive complexes in yeast: nucleosomes and non-​ histone barriers. Mol. Cell 65, 565–577.e3 (2017). 68. Kubik, S. et al. A reply to “MNase-​sensitive complexes in yeast: nucleosomes and non-​histone barriers,” by Chereji et al. Mol. Cell 65, 578–580 (2017). 69. Voong, L. N. et al. Insights into nucleosome organization in mouse embryonic stem cells through chemical mapping. Cell 167, 1555–1570 (2016). This study uses a chemical mapping approach to evaluate pausing and nucleosome occupancy at promoter regions. 70. Weber, C. M., Ramachandran, S. & Henikoff, S. Nucleosomes are context-​specific, H2A. Z-​modulated barriers to RNA polymerase. Mol. Cell 53, 819–830 71. Hu, G. et al. H2A. Z facilitates access of active and repressive complexes to chromatin in embryonic stem cell self-​renewal and differentiation. Cell Stem Cell 12, 72. Sainsbury, S., Bernecky, C. & Cramer, P. Structural basis of transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 129–143 (2015). 73. Grunberg, S. & Hahn, S. Structural insights into transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II. Trends Biochem. Sci. 38, 603–611 (2013). 74. Compe, E. & Egly, J. M. TFIIH: when transcription met DNA repair. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 13, 343–354 75. Kim, T. K., Ebright, R. H. & Reinberg, D. Mechanism of ATP-​dependent promoter melting by transcription factor IIH. Science 288, 1418–1422 (2000). 76. Li, J. et al. Kinetic competition between elongation rate and binding of NELF controls promoter-​proximal pausing. Mol. Cell 50, 711–722 (2013). 77. Glover-​Cutter, K. et al. TFIIH-​associated Cdk7 kinase functions in phosphorylation of C-​terminal domain

[Page 13]

Ser7 residues, promoter-​proximal pausing, and termination by RNA polymerase II. Mol. Cell. Biol. 29, 78. Akhtar, M. S. et al. TFIIH kinase places bivalent marks on the carboxy-​terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. Mol. Cell 34, 387–393 (2009). 79. Harlen, K. M. & Churchman, L. S. The code and beyond: transcription regulation by the RNA polymerase II carboxy-​terminal domain. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 263–273 (2017). 80. Allen, B. L. & Taatjes, D. J. The mediator complex: a central integrator of transcription. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 155–166 (2015). 81. Soutourina, J. Transcription regulation by the mediator complex. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm.2017.115 (2017). 82. Jeronimo, C. & Robert, F. Kin28 regulates the transient association of mediator with core promoters. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 21, 449–455 (2014). 83. Bentley, D. L. Coupling mRNA processing with transcription in time and space. Nat. Rev. Genet. 15, 84. Brannan, K. et al. mRNA decapping factors and the exonuclease Xrn2 function in widespread premature termination of RNA polymerase II transcription. Mol. Cell 46, 311–324 (2012). 85. Nilson, K. A. et al. THZ1 reveals roles for Cdk7 in co-​transcriptional capping and pausing. Mol. Cell 59, 86. Ebmeier, C. C. et al. Human TFIIH kinase CDK7 regulates transcription-​associated chromatin modifications. Cell Rep. 20, 1173–1186 (2017). 87. Larochelle, S. et al. Cyclin-​dependent kinase control of the initiation-​to-elongation switch of RNA polymerase II. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 19, 1108–1115 (2012). 88. Yamaguchi, Y. et al. NELF, a multisubunit complex containing RD, cooperates with DSIF to repress RNA polymerase II elongation. Cell 97, 41–51 (1999). 89. Renner, D. B., Yamaguchi, Y., Wada, T., Handa, H. & Price, D. H. A highly purified RNA polymerase II elongation control system. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 90. Palangat, M., Renner, D. B., Price, D. H. & Landick, R. A negative elongation factor for human RNA polymerase II inhibits the anti-​arrest transcript-​ cleavage factor TFIIS. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 91. Wen, Y. & Shatkin, A. J. Transcription elongation factor hSPT5 stimulates mRNA capping. Genes Dev. 13, 92. Doamekpor, S. K., Sanchez, A. M., Schwer, B., Shuman, S. & Lima, C. D. How an mRNA capping enzyme reads distinct RNA polymerase II and Spt5 CTD phosphorylation codes. Genes Dev. 28, 93. Pei, Y. & Shuman, S. Interactions between fission yeast mRNA capping enzymes and elongation factor Spt5. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 19639–19648 (2002). 94. Mandal, S. S. et al. Functional interactions of RNA-​ capping enzyme with factors that positively and negatively regulate promoter escape by RNA polymerase II. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 95. Qiu, Y. & Gilmour, D. S. Identification of regions in the Spt5 Subunit of DRB Sensitivity-​inducing Factor (DSIF) that are involved in promoter-​proximal pausing. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 5555–5570 (2017). 96. Bernecky, C., Plitzko, J. M. & Cramer, P. Structure of a transcribing RNA polymerase II-​DSIF complex reveals a multidentate DNA-​RNA clamp. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 24, 809–815 (2017). 97. Ehara, H. et al. Structure of the complete elongation complex of RNA polymerase II with basal factors. Science 357, 921–924 (2017). 98. Vos, S. M. et al. Architecture and RNA binding of the human negative elongation factor. eLife 5, e14981 99. Jadlowsky, J. K. et al. Negative elongation factor is required for the maintenance of proviral latency but does not induce promoter-​proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II on the HIV long terminal repeat. Mol. Cell. Biol. 34, 1911–1928 (2014). 100. Gilchrist, D. A. et al. NELF-​mediated stalling of Pol II can enhance gene expression by blocking promoter-​proximal nucleosome assembly. Genes Dev. 22, 1921–1933 (2008). 101. Core, L. J. et al. Defining the status of RNA polymerase at promoters. Cell Rep. 2, 1025–1035 102. Yamaguchi, Y., Inukai, N., Narita, T., Wada, T. & Handa, H. Evidence that negative elongation factor represses transcription elongation through binding to

a DRB sensitivity-​inducing factor/RNA polymerase II complex and RNA. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 2918–2927 103. Schaukowitch, K. et al. Enhancer RNA facilitates NELF release from immediate early genes. Mol. Cell 56, 104. Tan, S., Conaway, R. C. & Conaway, J. W. Dissection of transcription factor TFIIF functional domains required for initiation and elongation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 6042–6046 (1995). 105. Ishibashi, T. et al. Transcription factors IIS and IIF enhance transcription efficiency by differentially modifying RNA polymerase pausing dynamics. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, 3419–3424 106. Cheng, B. et al. Functional association of Gdown1 with RNA polymerase II poised on human genes. Mol. Cell 45, 38–50 (2012). 107. Wu, Y. M. et al. Regulation of mammalian transcription by Gdown1 through a novel steric crosstalk revealed by cryo-​EM. EMBO J. 31, 3575–3587 (2012). 108. Mullen Davis, M. A., Guo, J., Price, D. H. & Luse, D. S. Functional interactions of the RNA polymerase II-​ interacting proteins Gdown1 and TFIIF. J. Biol. Chem. 289, 11143–11152 (2014). 109. DeLaney, E. & Luse, D. S. Gdown1 associates efficiently with RNA Polymerase II after promoter clearance and displaces TFIIF during transcript elongation. PLoS ONE 11, e0163649 (2016). 110. Kim, J., Guermah, M. & Roeder, R. G. The human PAF1 complex acts in chromatin transcription elongation both independently and cooperatively with SII/TFIIS. Cell 140, 491–503 (2010). 111. Chen, Y. et al. DSIF, the Paf1 complex, and Tat-​SF1 have nonredundant, cooperative roles in RNA polymerase II elongation. Genes Dev. 23, 2765–2777 112. Bai, X. et al. TIF1gamma controls erythroid cell fate by regulating transcription elongation. Cell 142, 113. Chen, F. X. et al. PAF1 regulation of promoter-​ proximal pause release via enhancer activation. Science 357, 1294–1298 (2017). This study reveals a connection between PAF1 regulating enhancer activation to regulate pause release of nearby genes. 114. Yu, M. et al. RNA polymerase II-​associated factor 1 regulates the release and phosphorylation of paused RNA polymerase II. Science 350, 1383–1386 115. Jaenicke, L. A. et al. Ubiquitin-​dependent turnover of MYC antagonizes MYC/PAF1C complex accumulation to drive transcriptional elongation. Mol. Cell 61, 116. Marshall, N. F. & Price, D. H. Control of formation of two distinct classes of RNA polymerase II elongation complexes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 12, 2078–2090 (1992). 117. Sehgal, P. B., Darnell, J. E. Jr & Tamm, I. The inhibition by DRB (5,6-dichloro-1-beta-Dribofuranosylbenzimidazole) of hnRNA and mRNA production in HeLa cells. Cell 9, 473–480 (1976). 118. Fujinaga, K. et al. Dynamics of human immunodeficiency virus transcription: P-​TEFb phosphorylates RD and dissociates negative effectors from the transactivation response element. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 787–795 (2004). 119. Kim, J. B. & Sharp, P. A. Positive transcription elongation factor B phosphorylates hSPT5 and RNA polymerase II carboxyl-​terminal domain independently of cyclin-​dependent kinase-​activating kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 12317–12323 (2001). 120. Marshall, N. F., Peng, J., Xie, Z. & Price, D. H. Control of RNA polymerase II elongation potential by a novel carboxyl-​terminal domain kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 121. Sanso, M. et al. P-​TEFb regulation of transcription termination factor Xrn2 revealed by a chemical genetic screen for Cdk9 substrates. Genes Dev. 30, 117–131 This study uses a chemical genetic screen to identify 100 potential substrates of CDK9 that are implicated in various steps of transcription. 122. Wu, C. H. et al. NELF and DSIF cause promoter proximal pausing on the hsp70 promoter in Drosophila. Genes Dev. 17, 1402–1414 (2003). 123. Yamada, T. et al. P-​TEFb-mediated phosphorylation of hSpt5 C-​terminal repeats is critical for processive transcription elongation. Mol. Cell 21, 227–237 124. Smith, E., Lin, C. & Shilatifard, A. The super elongation complex (SEC) and MLL in development and disease. Genes Dev. 25, 661–672 (2011).

125. Luo, Z., Lin, C. & Shilatifard, A. The super elongation complex (SEC) family in transcriptional control. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 13, 543–547 (2012). 126. Michels, A. A. et al. MAQ1 and 7SK RNA interact with CDK9/cyclin T complexes in a transcription-​dependent manner. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 4859–4869 (2003). 127. Zhou, Q., Li, T. & Price, D. H. RNA polymerase II elongation control. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 81, 119–143 128. Lin, C. et al. Dynamic transcriptional events in embryonic stem cells mediated by the super elongation complex (SEC). Genes Dev. 25, 129. Lu, H. et al. AFF1 is a ubiquitous P-​TEFb partner to enable Tat extraction of P-​TEFb from 7SK snRNP and formation of SECs for HIV transactivation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111, E15–E24 (2014). 130. McNamara, R. P. et al. KAP1 recruitment of the 7SK snRNP complex to promoters enables transcription elongation by RNA polymerase II. Mol. Cell 61, 131. Ji, X. et al. SR proteins collaborate with 7SK and promoter-​associated nascent RNA to release paused polymerase. Cell 153, 855–868 (2013). 132. Winter, G. E. et al. BET bromodomain proteins function as master transcription elongation factors independent of CDK9 recruitment. Mol. Cell 67, 5–18.e19 (2017). This study uses acute protein degradation to study the regulation of transcription elongation by BRD4. 133. Rahman, S. et al. The Brd4 extraterminal domain confers transcription activation independent of pTEFb by recruiting multiple proteins, including NSD3. Mol. Cell. Biol. 31, 2641–2652 (2011). 134. Devaiah, B. N. et al. BRD4 is an atypical kinase that phosphorylates serine2 of the RNA polymerase II carboxy-​terminal domain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, 6927–6932 (2012). 135. Kanno, T. et al. BRD4 assists elongation of both coding and enhancer RNAs by interacting with acetylated histones. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 21, 136. Sobhian, B. et al. HIV-1 Tat assembles a multifunctional transcription elongation complex and stably associates with the 7SK snRNP. Mol. Cell 38, 137. Cho, W. K. et al. Modulation of the Brd4/P-​TEFb interaction by the human T-​lymphotropic virus type 1 tax protein. J. Virol. 81, 11179–11186 (2007). 138. Garber, M. E. et al. The interaction between HIV-1 Tat and human cyclin T1 requires zinc and a critical cysteine residue that is not conserved in the murine CycT1 protein. Genes Dev. 12, 3512–3527 (1998). 139. Shilatifard, A. The COMPASS family of histone H3K4 methylases: mechanisms of regulation in development and disease pathogenesis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 81, 140. He, N. et al. HIV-1 Tat and host AFF4 recruit two transcription elongation factors into a bifunctional complex for coordinated activation of HIV-1 transcription. Mol. Cell 38, 428–438 (2010). 141. Liu, K. et al. The super elongation complex drives neural stem cell fate commitment. Dev. Cell 40, 537–551 e6 (2017). This study shows that SEC can physically interact with and be recruited by the RBPJ (also known as CSL) transcription factor to activate Notch signalling. 142. Gardini, A. et al. Integrator regulates transcriptional initiation and pause release following activation. Mol. Cell 56, 128–139 (2014). 143. Wan, L. et al. ENL links histone acetylation to oncogenic gene expression in acute myeloid leukaemia. Nature 543, 265–269 (2017). 144. Erb, M. A. et al. Transcription control by the ENL YEATS domain in acute leukaemia. Nature 543, References 143 and 144 reveal that binding of ENL to acetylated histones is required for the recruitment of the SEC and DOT1L to their target genes to promote MLL-​rearranged leukaemia. 145. Zhang, Z. et al. Crosstalk between histone modifications indicates that inhibition of arginine methyltransferase CARM1 activity reverses HIV latency. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 9348–9360 (2017). 146. Gates, L. A. et al. Acetylation on histone H3 lysine 9 mediates a switch from transcription initiation to elongation. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 14456–14472 147. Takahashi, H. et al. Human mediator subunit MED26 functions as a docking site for transcription elongation factors. Cell 146, 92–104 (2011).

[Page 14]

148. Lens, Z. et al. Solution structure of the N-​terminal domain of Mediator subunit MED26 and molecular characterization of its interaction with EAF1 and TAF7. J. Mol. Biol. 429, 3043–3055 (2017). 149. Hu, D. et al. The little elongation complex functions at initiation and elongation phases of snRNA gene transcription. Mol. Cell 51, 493–505 (2013). 150. Smith, E. R. et al. The little elongation complex regulates small nuclear RNA transcription. Mol. Cell 44, 954–965 (2011). 151. Takahashi, H. et al. MED26 regulates the transcription of snRNA genes through the recruitment of little elongation complex. Nat. Commun. 6, 5941 (2015). 152. Talbert, P. B. & Henikoff, S. Histone variants on the move: substrates for chromatin dynamics. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 115–126 (2017). 153. Lai, W. K. M. & Pugh, B. F. Understanding nucleosome dynamics and their links to gene expression and DNA replication. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 548–562 154. Venkatesh, S. & Workman, J. L. Histone exchange, chromatin structure and the regulation of transcription. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 178–189 155. Kornberg, R. D. & Lorch, Y. Twenty-​five years of the nucleosome, fundamental particle of the eukaryote chromosome. Cell 98, 285–294 (1999). 156. Kireeva, M. L. et al. Nucleosome remodeling induced by RNA polymerase II: loss of the H2A/H2B dimer during transcription. Mol. Cell 9, 541–552 157. Orphanides, G., LeRoy, G., Chang, C. H., Luse, D. S. & Reinberg, D. FACT, a factor that facilitates transcript elongation through nucleosomes. Cell 92, 105–116 158. Bondarenko, V. A. et al. Nucleosomes can form a polar barrier to transcript elongation by RNA polymerase II. Mol. Cell 24, 469–479 (2006). 159. Saunders, A. et al. Tracking FACT and the RNA polymerase II elongation complex through chromatin in vivo. Science 301, 1094–1096 (2003). 160. Hondele, M. et al. Structural basis of histone H2A-​H2B recognition by the essential chaperone FACT. Nature 499, 111–114 (2013). 161. Kemble, D. J., McCullough, L. L., Whitby, F. G., Formosa, T. & Hill, C. P. FACT disrupts nucleosome structure by binding H2A-​H2B with conserved peptide motifs. Mol. Cell 60, 294–306 (2015). 162. Petesch, S. J. & Lis, J. T. Overcoming the nucleosome barrier during transcript elongation. Trends Genet. 28, 163. Teves, S. S., Weber, C. M. & Henikoff, S. Transcribing through the nucleosome. Trends Biochem. Sci. 39, 164. Simic, R. et al. Chromatin remodeling protein Chd1 interacts with transcription elongation factors and localizes to transcribed genes. EMBO J. 22, 165. Kaplan, C. D., Holland, M. J. & Winston, F. Interaction between transcription elongation factors and mRNA 3′-end formation at the Saccharomyces cerevisiae GAL10-GAL7 locus. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 913–922 166. Pruneski, J. A., Hainer, S. J., Petrov, K. O. & Martens, J. A. The Paf1 complex represses SER3 transcription in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by facilitating intergenic transcription-​dependent nucleosome occupancy of the SER3 promoter. Eukaryot. Cell 10, 167. Pavri, R. et al. Histone H2B monoubiquitination functions cooperatively with FACT to regulate elongation by RNA polymerase II. Cell 125, 703–717 168. Krogan, N. J. et al. The Paf1 complex is required for histone H3 methylation by COMPASS and Dot1p: linking transcriptional elongation to histone methylation. Mol. Cell 11, 721–729 169. Wood, A., Schneider, J., Dover, J., Johnston, M. & Shilatifard, A. The Paf1 complex is essential for histone monoubiquitination by the Rad6-Bre1 complex, which signals for histone methylation by COMPASS and Dot1p. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 170. Ng, H. H., Dole, S. & Struhl, K. The Rtf1 component of the Paf1 transcriptional elongation complex is required for ubiquitination of histone H2B. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 33625–33628 (2003). 171. Grohmann, D. et al. The initiation factor TFE and the elongation factor Spt4/5 compete for the RNAP clamp during transcription initiation and elongation. Mol. Cell 43, 263–274 (2011).

172. Klein, B. J. et al. RNA polymerase and transcription elongation factor Spt4/5 complex structure. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 546–550 (2011). 173. Shetty, A. et al. Spt5 plays vital roles in the control of sense and antisense transcription elongation. Mol. Cell 66, 77–88.e5 (2017). 174. Guenther, M. G., Levine, S. S., Boyer, L. A., Jaenisch, R. & Young, R. A. A chromatin landmark and transcription initiation at most promoters in human cells. Cell 130, 175. Fuchs, G., Hollander, D., Voichek, Y., Ast, G. & Oren, M. Cotranscriptional histone H2B monoubiquitylation is tightly coupled with RNA polymerase II elongation rate. Genome Res. 24, 1572–1583 (2014). 176. Vakoc, C. R., Sachdeva, M. M., Wang, H. & Blobel, G. A. Profile of histone lysine methylation across transcribed mammalian chromatin. Mol. Cell. Biol. 26, 9185–9195 177. Lee, J. S., Smith, E. & Shilatifard, A. The language of histone crosstalk. Cell 142, 682–685 (2010). 178. Barski, A. et al. High-​resolution profiling of histone methylations in the human genome. Cell 129, 179. Batta, K., Zhang, Z., Yen, K., Goffman, D. B. & Pugh, B. F. Genome-​wide function of H2B ubiquitylation in promoter and genic regions. Genes Dev. 25, 2254–2265 (2011). 180. Lee, J. S. et al. Codependency of H2B monoubiquitination and nucleosome reassembly on Chd1. Genes Dev. 26, 914–919 (2012). 181. Tanny, J. C., Erdjument-​Bromage, H., Tempst, P. & Allis, C. D. Ubiquitylation of histone H2B controls RNA polymerase II transcription elongation independently of histone H3 methylation. Genes Dev. 21, 835–847 182. Segala, G., Bennesch, M. A., Pandey, D. P., Hulo, N. & Picard, D. Monoubiquitination of histone H2B blocks eviction of histone variant H2A.Z. from inducible enhancers. Mol. Cell 64, 334–346 (2016). 183. Xie, W. et al. RNF40 regulates gene expression in an epigenetic context-​dependent manner. Genome Biol. 18, 32 (2017). 184. McDaniel, S. L. & Strahl, B. D. Shaping the cellular landscape with Set2/SETD2 methylation. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 74, 3317–3334 (2017). 185. Carrozza, M. J. et al. Histone H3 methylation by Set2 directs deacetylation of coding regions by Rpd3S to suppress spurious intragenic transcription. Cell 123, 186. Smolle, M. et al. Chromatin remodelers Isw1 and Chd1 maintain chromatin structure during transcription by preventing histone exchange. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 19, 884–892 (2012). 187. Baubec, T. et al. Genomic profiling of DNA methyltransferases reveals a role for DNMT3B in genic methylation. Nature 520, 243–247 (2015). 188. Neri, F. et al. Intragenic DNA methylation prevents spurious transcription initiation. Nature 543, 72–77 References 187 and 188 demonstrate that DNMT3B recognizes SETD2-mediated H3K36me3 and catalyses intragenic DNA methylation to ensure the fidelity of gene transcription. 189. Zhu, B. et al. The human PAF complex coordinates transcription with events downstream of RNA synthesis. Genes Dev. 19, 1668–1673 (2005). 190. Wang, E. et al. Histone H2B ubiquitin ligase RNF20 is required for MLL-​rearranged leukemia. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 110, 3901–3906 (2013). 191. Nakanishi, S. et al. Histone H2BK123 monoubiquitination is the critical determinant for H3K4 and H3K79 trimethylation by COMPASS and Dot1. J. Cell Biol. 186, 371–377 (2009). 192. Lee, J. S. et al. Histone crosstalk between H2B monoubiquitination and H3 methylation mediated by COMPASS. Cell 131, 1084–1096 (2007). 193. Mohan, M. et al. Linking H3K79 trimethylation to Wnt signaling through a novel Dot1-containing complex (DotCom). Genes Dev. 24, 574–589 (2010). 194. Dillon, S. C., Zhang, X., Trievel, R. C. & Cheng, X. The SET-​domain protein superfamily: protein lysine methyltransferases. Genome Biol. 6, 227 195. Yankulov, K., Blau, J., Purton, T., Roberts, S. & Bentley, D. L. Transcriptional elongation by RNA polymerase II is stimulated by transactivators. Cell 77, 196. Smith, E. & Shilatifard, A. Enhancer biology and enhanceropathies. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 21, 197. Heinz, S., Romanoski, C. E., Benner, C. & Glass, C. K. The selection and function of cell type-​specific

enhancers. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 144–154 198. Rollins, R. A., Korom, M., Aulner, N., Martens, A. & Dorsett, D. Drosophila nipped-​B protein supports sister chromatid cohesion and opposes the stromalin/ Scc3 cohesion factor to facilitate long-​range activation of the cut gene. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 3100–3111 199. Phillips-​Cremins, J. E. et al. Architectural protein subclasses shape 3D organization of genomes during lineage commitment. Cell 153, 1281–1295 200. Kagey, M. H. et al. Mediator and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin architecture. Nature 467, 201. Schaaf, C. A. et al. Genome-​wide control of RNA polymerase II activity by cohesin. PLoS Genet. 9, e1003382 (2013). 202. Fay, A. et al. Cohesin selectively binds and regulates genes with paused RNA polymerase. Curr. Biol. 21, 203. Wu, Y. et al. Drosophila Nipped-​B mutants model cornelia de lange syndrome in growth and behavior. PLoS Genet. 11, e1005655 (2015). 204. Izumi, K. et al. Germline gain-​of-function mutations in AFF4 cause a developmental syndrome functionally linking the super elongation complex and cohesin. Nat. Genet. 47, 338–344 (2015). This study identifies mutations of AFF4 that stabilize the protein as the cause of CHOPS syndrome. 205. Jishage, M. et al. Transcriptional regulation by Pol II(G) involving mediator and competitive interactions of Gdown1 and TFIIF with Pol II. Mol. Cell 45, 51–63 206. Galbraith, M. D. et al. HIF1A employs CDK8-mediator to stimulate RNAPII elongation in response to hypoxia. Cell 153, 1327–1339 (2013). 207. Donner, A. J., Ebmeier, C. C., Taatjes, D. J. & Espinosa, J. M. CDK8 is a positive regulator of transcriptional elongation within the serum response network. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17, 194–201 (2010). 208. Herz, H. M. et al. Enhancer-​associated H3K4 monomethylation by trithorax-​related, the Drosophila homolog of mammalian Mll3/Mll4. Genes Dev. 26, 209. Hu, D. et al. The MLL3/MLL4 branches of the COMPASS family function as major histone H3K4 monomethylases at enhancers. Mol. Cell. Biol. 33, 210. Tie, F. et al. CBP-​mediated acetylation of histone H3 lysine 27 antagonizes Drosophila Polycomb silencing. Development 136, 3131–3141 (2009). 211. Creyghton, M. P. et al. Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers and predicts developmental state. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 212. Shen, Y. et al. A map of the cis-​regulatory sequences in the mouse genome. Nature 488, 116–120 (2012). 213. Flynn, R. A. et al. 7SK-​BAF axis controls pervasive transcription at enhancers. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 23, 214. Hertweck, A. et al. T-​Bet activates Th1 genes through mediator and the super elongation complex. Cell Rep. 15, 2756–2770 (2016). 215. Loven, J. et al. Selective inhibition of tumor oncogenes by disruption of super-​enhancers. Cell 153, 320–334 216. Lin, C., Garruss, A. S., Luo, Z., Guo, F. & Shilatifard, A. The RNA Pol II elongation factor Ell3 marks enhancers in ES cells and primes future gene activation. Cell 152, 217. Pommier, Y., Sun, Y., Huang, S. N. & Nitiss, J. L. Roles of eukaryotic topoisomerases in transcription, replication and genomic stability. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 17, 703–721 (2016). 218. Corless, S. & Gilbert, N. Effects of DNA supercoiling on chromatin architecture. Biophys. Rev. 8, 51–64 219. Bunch, H. et al. Transcriptional elongation requires DNA break-​induced signalling. Nat. Commun. 6, 10191 (2015). 220. Ju, B. G. et al. A topoisomerase IIbeta-​mediated dsDNA break required for regulated transcription. Science 312, 1798–1802 (2006). 221. Madabhushi, R. et al. Activity-​induced DNA breaks govern the expression of neuronal early-​response genes. Cell 161, 1592–1605 (2015). 222. Gomez-​Herreros, F. et al. TDP2 protects transcription from abortive topoisomerase activity and is required for normal neural function. Nat. Genet. 46, 516–521

[Page 15]

223. Zeng, Z., Cortes-​Ledesma, F., El Khamisy, S. F. & Caldecott, K. W. TDP2/TTRAP is the major 5′-tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterase activity in vertebrate cells and is critical for cellular resistance to topoisomerase II-​induced DNA damage. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 224. Baranello, L. et al. RNA polymerase II regulates topoisomerase 1 activity to favor efficient transcription. Cell 165, 357–371 (2016). 225. Li, M., Pokharel, S., Wang, J. T., Xu, X. & Liu, Y. RECQ5-dependent SUMOylation of DNA topoisomerase I prevents transcription-​associated genome instability. Nat. Commun. 6, 6720 (2015). 226. Solier, S. et al. Transcription poisoning by topoisomerase I is controlled by gene length, splice sites, and miR-142-3p. Cancer Res. 73, 4830–4839 227. King, I. F. et al. Topoisomerases facilitate transcription of long genes linked to autism. Nature 501, 58–62 228. Zhang, X. et al. Attenuation of RNA polymerase II pausing mitigates BRCA1-associated R-​loop accumulation and tumorigenesis. Nat. Commun. 8, 15908 (2017). 229. Skourti-​Stathaki, K. & Proudfoot, N. J. A doubleedged sword: R loops as threats to genome integrity and powerful regulators of gene expression. Genes Dev. 28, 1384–1396 (2014). 230. Tuduri, S. et al. Topoisomerase I suppresses genomic instability by preventing interference between replication and transcription. Nat. Cell Biol. 11, 231. Groh, M., Lufino, M. M., Wade-​Martins, R. & Gromak, N. R-​Loops associated with triplet repeat expansions promote gene silencing in Friedreich ataxia and fragile X syndrome. PLoS Genet. 10, e1004318 232. Saponaro, M. et al. RECQL5 controls transcript elongation and suppresses genome instability associated with transcription stress. Cell 157, 233. Wilson-​Sali, T. & Hsieh, T. S. Preferential cleavage of plasmid-​based R-​loops and D-​loops by Drosophila topoisomerase IIIbeta. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 234. Ahmad, M. et al. Topoisomerase 3beta is the major topoisomerase for mRNAs and linked to neurodevelopment and mental dysfunction. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 2704–2713 (2017). 235. Yang, Y. et al. Arginine methylation facilitates the recruitment of TOP3B to chromatin to prevent R loop accumulation. Mol. Cell 53, 484–497 (2014). 236. Siaw, G. E., Liu, I. F., Lin, P. Y., Been, M. D. & Hsieh, T. S. DNA and RNA topoisomerase activities of Top3beta are promoted by mediator protein tudor domain-​containing protein 3. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, E5544–E5551 (2016). 237. Goto-​Ito, S., Yamagata, A., Takahashi, T. S., Sato, Y. & Fukai, S. Structural basis of the interaction between topoisomerase IIIbeta and the TDRD3 auxiliary factor. Sci. Rep. 7, 42123 (2017). 238. Ray Chaudhuri, A. & Nussenzweig, A. The multifaceted roles of PARP1 in DNA repair and chromatin remodelling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 610–621 239. Hottiger, M. O. Nuclear ADP-​ribosylation and its role in chromatin plasticity, cell differentiation, and epigenetics. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 84, 227–263

240. Gupte, R., Liu, Z. & Kraus, W. L. PARPs and ADP-​ ribosylation: recent advances linking molecular functions to biological outcomes. Genes Dev. 31, 241. Wright, R. H. et al. ADP-​ribose-derived nuclear ATP synthesis by NUDIX5 is required for chromatin remodeling. Science 352, 1221–1225 242. Gibson, B. A. et al. Chemical genetic discovery of PARP targets reveals a role for PARP-1 in transcription elongation. Science 353, 45–50 (2016). This study utilizes a chemical genetic strategy and identifies hundreds of substrates of PARPs, many of which are involved in transcription elongation, including the NELF complex. 243. Leutert, M., Pedrioli, D. M. & Hottiger, M. O. Identification of PARP-​specific ADP-​ribosylation targets reveals a regulatory function for ADP-​ ribosylation in transcription elongation. Mol. Cell 63, 244. Calderwood, S. K. A critical role for topoisomerase IIb and DNA double strand breaks in transcription. Transcription 7, 75–83 (2016). 245. Huang, J. Y. et al. Modulation of nucleosome-​binding activity of FACT by poly(ADP-​ribosyl)ation. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, 2398–2407 (2006). 246. Heo, K. et al. FACT-​mediated exchange of histone variant H2AX regulated by phosphorylation of H2AX and ADP-​ribosylation of Spt16. Mol. Cell 30, 86–97 247. Gao, F., Kwon, S. W., Zhao, Y. & Jin, Y. PARP1 poly(ADP-​ribosyl)ates Sox2 to control Sox2 protein levels and FGF4 expression during embryonic stem cell differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 248. Krishnakumar, R. & Kraus, W. L. PARP-1 regulates chromatin structure and transcription through a KDM5B-​dependent pathway. Mol. Cell 39, 736–749 249. Kidder, B. L., Hu, G. & Zhao, K. KDM5B focuses H3K4 methylation near promoters and enhancers during embryonic stem cell self-​renewal and differentiation. Genome Biol. 15, R32 (2014). 250. Liu, Z. & Kraus, W. L. Catalytic-​independent functions of PARP-1 determine Sox2 pioneer activity at intractable genomic loci. Mol. Cell 65, 589–603.9 251. Chou, D. M. et al. A chromatin localization screen reveals poly (ADP ribose)-regulated recruitment of the repressive polycomb and NuRD complexes to sites of DNA damage. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 252. Spruijt, C. G. et al. ZMYND8 co-​localizes with NuRD on target genes and regulates poly(ADP-​Ribose)dependent recruitment of GATAD2A/NuRD to sites of DNA damage. Cell Rep. 17, 783–798 (2016). 253. Kwiatkowski, N. et al. Targeting transcription regulation in cancer with a covalent CDK7 inhibitor. Nature 511, 616–620 (2014). 254. Pelish, H. E. et al. Mediator kinase inhibition further activates super-​enhancer-associated genes in AML. Nature 526, 273–276 (2015). This study shows that inhibition of the Mediator-​ associated kinases CDK8 and CDK19 with cortistatin A leads to activation of super-​enhancers and upregulation of super-​enhancer-associated genes. 255. Cee, V. J., Chen, D. Y., Lee, M. R. & Nicolaou, K. C. Cortistatin A is a high-​affinity ligand of protein kinases

ROCK, CDK8, and CDK11. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed Engl. 48, 8952–8957 (2009). 256. Chao, S. H. et al. Flavopiridol inhibits P-​TEFb and blocks HIV-1 replication. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 257. Miller, T. E. et al. Transcription elongation factors represent in vivo cancer dependencies in glioblastoma. Nature 547, 355–359 (2017). This study uses an in vivo functional screening strategy and demonstrates the requirement of many pausing and elongation factors for glioblastoma cell survival. 258. Liang, K. et al. Therapeutic targeting of MLL degradation pathways in MLL-​rearranged leukemia. Cell 168, 59–72.e13 (2017). 259. Kuehner, J. N., Pearson, E. L. & Moore, C. Unravelling the means to an end: RNA polymerase II transcription termination. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 12, 283–294 260. Porrua, O. & Libri, D. Transcription termination and the control of the transcriptome: why, where and how to stop. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 190–202 (2015). 261. Fong, N. et al. Effects of transcription elongation rate and Xrn2 exonuclease activity on RNA polymerase II termination suggest widespread kinetic competition. Mol. Cell 60, 256–267 (2015). 262. Zhang, H., Rigo, F. & Martinson, H. G. Poly(A) signal-​ dependent transcription termination occurs through a conformational change mechanism that does not require cleavage at the poly(A) site. Mol. Cell 59, 263. Libri, D. Endless quarrels at the end of genes. Mol. Cell 60, 192–194 (2015). 264. Ni, Z., Schwartz, B. E., Werner, J., Suarez, J. R. & Lis, J. T. Coordination of transcription, RNA processing, and surveillance by P-​TEFb kinase on heat shock genes. Mol. Cell 13, 55–65 (2004). 265. Laitem, C. et al. CDK9 inhibitors define elongation checkpoints at both ends of RNA polymerase II-​transcribed genes. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 22, 266. Skourti-​Stathaki, K., Kamieniarz-​Gdula, K. & Proudfoot, N. J. R-​Loops induce repressive chromatin marks over mammalian gene terminators. Nature 516, 436–439 (2014). 267. Skourti-​Stathaki, K., Proudfoot, N. J. & Gromak, N. Human senataxin resolves RNA/DNA hybrids formed at transcriptional pause sites to promote Xrn2dependent termination. Mol. Cell 42, 794–805 268. Zhao, D. Y. et al. SMN and symmetric arginine dimethylation of RNA polymerase II C-​terminal domain control termination. Nature 529, 48–53 (2016). 269. Xu, Y. et al. Architecture of the RNA polymerase II-​Paf1C-​TFIIS transcription elongation complex. Nat. Commun. 8, 15741 (2017).

Author contributions F.X.C., E.R.S. and A.S. researched data for the article, made substantial contributions to the discussion of content, wrote the article and reviewed and edited the manuscript before submission.

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.

Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
