[Page 1]

Leading Edge

Chromatin: Liquid or Solid? Alexandra Zidovska1,* 1Center for Soft Matter Research, Department of Physics, New York University, New York, New York, USA *Correspondence: alexandra.zidovska@nyu.edu https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.044

In this issue of Cell, Strickfaden et al. reveal that condensed chromatin shows a solid-like behavior at mesoscales both in vitro and in living cells. Using fluorescent microscopy, fluorescent recovery after photobleaching, and transmission electron microscopy, this work investigates chromatin condensates, providing new insights into the physical organization of the genome.

Genome organization has puzzled biologists and physicists alike. Packing 2 m of DNA molecule inside a nucleus barely 10 mm in diameter while maintaining accessibility and functionality of the genome is not trivial. Over the past decade, chromosome conformation capture techniques have revealed intricate rules for genome folding on different length scales, from loops to topologically associated domains to A and B compartments to chromosome territories. Remarkably, despite the wealth of structural detail about genome folding, its biophysical properties remain far from understood (Zidovska, 2020a). However, elucidating the physical properties of the genome is critical, as they directly impact the timescales and length scales of nuclear processes such as transcription, which in turn affect all cellular processes via the central dogma of biology. In the current issue of Cell, Strickfaden et al. present a major contribution to this effort (Strickfaden et al., 2020). The authors set out to measure mobility and miscibility of reconstructed nucleosomal arrays as well as native chromatin fragments inside chromatin condensates in vitro and in live cells, which directly report on the physical state of the genome (Figure 1). They use a combined approach of fluorescence microscopy, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP), and transmission electron microscopy to assess the physical nature of chromatin. Mobility and mixing of components within a molecular condensate strongly depend on its physical state. The authors form chromatin condensates in vitro from native chromatin and nucleosomal arrays

under a variety of physiologically relevant conditions, revealing that such condensates do not fuse with each other and that nucleosomal arrays are immobile in these condensates (Strickfaden et al., 2020). Such behavior is consistent with solid, comprising units that cannot move freely but instead are largely constrained (Figure 1). Interestingly, Strickfaden et al. found that only under very specific biochemical conditions do these condensates become liquid-like. To investigate the chromatin mobility and mixing in vivo, they visualize genomic DNA by incorporation of fluorescent nucleotides and perform FRAP measurements in both euchromatin and heterochromatin. Strikingly, DNA shows no mixing within both euchromatin and heterochromatin or upon hyperacetylation-induced decondensation, suggesting again a solid-like behavior (Figures 1) (Strickfaden et al., 2020). Moreover, given the observed constrained mobility and lack of mixing of nucleosomal arrays in vitro, the authors propose that formation of the solid-like chromatin is given by the innate nature of the chromatin fiber, independent from the presence of nonhistone proteins. Taken together, these results paint a new picture of a globally constrained genome. This observation is truly unexpected, especially considering the general liquidlike nature of most nuclear components. In fact, liquid-liquid phase separation of nucleoplasmic components has been recognized as a key principle governing the organization of the cell nucleus, leading to formation of functional liquid condensates such as nucleoli (Zidovska, 2020b). Moreover, liquid condensates of

heterochromatin HP1 proteins have been found earlier to drive the formation of heterochromatin (Strom et al., 2017; Larson et al., 2017). To this end, Strickfaden et al. performed FRAP measurements to determine the mobility of proteins known to form liquid condensates and participate in heterochromatin maintenance in vivo, and indeed, these proteins were mobile, consistent with the liquidlike nature of their condensates (Strickfaden et al., 2020). Based on these observations, the authors propose that it is the solid-like chromatin that serves as a scaffold providing nucleation sites for formation of liquid condensates via phase separation inside the nucleus (Figures 1). Interestingly, recent studies focused on nucleosomal dynamics suggested that chromatin behaves like a liquid at nanoscale (Nozaki et al., 2017). In addition, chromatin was found to be able to undergo liquid-liquid phase separation (Gibson et al., 2019). How do we reconcile these observations? The answer might come from polymer physics. Polymers such as chromatin fiber are viscoelastic in nature, exhibiting both solid-like and liquid-like behaviors. Indeed, the same polymer can behave as an elastic solid and as a viscous liquid at different timescales and length scales, which is described by its so-called rheological behavior. In fact, mechanical experiments using micropipette aspiration and micromanipulation techniques revealed a complex viscoelastic behavior of the cell nucleus, with chromatin as one of the contributing factors (Pajerowski et al., 2007; Stephens et al., 2018). Clearly, the rheological behavior of the genome is highly complex and directly linked to its

[Page 2]

ity driving chromatin motions as well as spatial heterogeneity of the genome. New theoretical frameworks are needed to describe such active systems far from thermodynamic equilibrium. Yet, it is exactly the rich phenomenology of the genome and its dynamics—given by the interplay of activity, heterogeneity, and rheology—that may guide new non-equilibrium treatments. Overall, elucidating the physical aspects of genome organization is critical for understanding genome function and gene regulation. Future insights from polymer physics and soft condensed matter physics combined with biochemistry and molecular biology may help to reveal biophysical principles underlying the genome organization. The work by Strickfaden et al. adds a new piece to this puzzle, unveiling the solid-like nature of chromatin condensates that can serve as a scaffold for nucleoplasmic phase separation. This enriches our current physical view of the genome and may help us to generate a mechanistic picture of the genome organization in both health and disease.

Figure 1. Physical State of Chromatin in Live Cells Cartoon of a cell and the cell nucleus with chromosomes shown to occupy distinct chromosome territories (lines of different colors). Top inset shows schematics of chromatin fibers in solid-like and liquid-like states. Bottom inset depicts solid-like chromatin fibers (blue lines) that serve as a scaffold for nucleation of phase-separated liquid condensates (yellow) in the nucleoplasm.

biological function. Furthermore, it is possible that the viscoelastic properties of chromatin are heterogeneous, locally tuned across the nucleus to accommodate different DNA-related biochemical transactions such as transcription, replication, or DNA repair. These processes are ATP dependent, likely leading to effective material properties that emerge in vivo (Zidovska, 2020b). Such unique physical behavior may reconcile many observations as well as provide a physical framework underlying the genome organization in space and time. Hence, future experiments exploring different timescales and length scales of chromatin organization both in vitro and in vivo might provide further insights into the physical state of the genome. In turn, such knowledge may shed light on dynamics of genomic interactions and gene regulation. 1738 Cell 183, December 23, 2020

To uncover physical principles underlying genome organization, studies of chromatin dynamics in vivo might prove particularly helpful. Chromatin motions reflect physical properties of the chromatin fiber and its environment. Interestingly, chromatin motions were found to be ATP dependent and largely constrained, with genomic loci undergoing subdiffusive motion and occasional directed motion (Zidovska, 2020a). In addition, mapping of local chromatin motions across the entire nucleus by displacement correlation spectroscopy revealed that chromatin motions within micronscale patches are correlated, with large parts of the genome traveling together for several seconds (Zidovska et al., 2013). However, inferring physical properties from chromatin dynamics is non-trivial, as such inferences must account for the presence of enzymatic activ-

REFERENCES Gibson, B.A., Doolittle, L.K., Schneider, M.W.G., Jensen, L.E., Gamarra, N., Henry, L., Gerlich, D.W., Redding, S., and Rosen, M.K. (2019). Organization of Chromatin by Intrinsic and Regulated Phase Separation. Cell 179, 470–484.e21. Larson, A.G., Elnatan, D., Keenen, M.M., Trnka, M.J., Johnston, J.B., Burlingame, A.L., Agard, D.A., Redding, S., and Narlikar, G.J. (2017). Liquid droplet formation by HP1a suggests a role for phase separation in heterochromatin. Nature 547, Nozaki, T., Imai, R., Tanbo, M., Nagashima, R., Tamura, S., Tani, T., Joti, Y., Tomita, M., Hibino, K., Kanemaki, M.T., et al. (2017). Dynamic Organization of Chromatin Domains Revealed by SuperResolution Live-Cell Imaging. Mol. Cell 67, 282–293.e7. Pajerowski, J.D., Dahl, K.N., Zhong, F.L., Sammak, P.J., and Discher, D.E. (2007). Physical plasticity of the nucleus in stem cell differentiation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 15619–15624. Stephens, A.D., Liu, P.Z., Banigan, E.J., Almassalha, L.M., Backman, V., Adam, S.A., Goldman, R.D., and Marko, J.F. (2018). Chromatin histone modifications and rigidity affect nuclear morphology independent of lamins. Mol. Biol. Cell 29, 220–233. Strickfaden, H., Tolsma, T.O., Sharma, A., Underhill, D.A., Hansen, J.C., and Hendzel, M.J. (2020). Condensed chromatin behaves like a solid on the

[Page 3]

mesoscale in vitro and in living cells. Cell 183, this issue, 1772–1784. Strom, A.R., Emelyanov, A.V., Mir, M., Fyodorov, D.V., Darzacq, X., and Karpen, G.H. (2017). Phase separation drives heterochromatin domain formation. Nature 547, 241–245.

Zidovska, A. (2020a). The self-stirred genome: large-scale chromatin dynamics, its biophysical origins and implications. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 61, 83–90. Zidovska, A. (2020b). The rich inner life of the cell nucleus: dynamic organization, active flows,

and emergent rheology. Biophys. Rev. 12, Zidovska, A., Weitz, D.A., and Mitchison, T.J. (2013). Micron-scale coherence in interphase chromatin dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 15555–15560.

Fighting for Fat: Gluttonous Tumors and Starved T Cells Joshua H. Goodman1,2 and Anthony W. Ferrante, Jr.2,* 1Medical Scientist Training Program, Vagelos College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA 2Department of Medicine, Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, Vagelos College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA *Correspondence: awf7@cumc.columbia.edu https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.039

In this issue of Cell, Ringel et al. reveal a link between lipid utilization in the tumor microenvironment and antitumor immunity in obese mice. These findings provide one explanation for how obesity worsens cancer outcomes and may point to a new metabolic approach to treating some cancers.

Many common cancers occur more frequently and progress more aggressively in individuals with obesity (Calle et al., 2003). Why obesity is associated with increased cancer incidence and morbidity remains poorly defined and is likely multifactorial. Obesity alters systemic, tissue, and cellular metabolism of glucose and lipids, which may play a role. To that end, obesity-associated insulin resistance and altered glucose utilization have been found to predict poor cancer outcomes (Demark-Wahnefried et al., 2012). Additionally, obesity is accompanied by changes in immune function and inflammation that have been implicated in cancer development and progression (Turbitt et al., 2020). Recently, obesity-associated changes in local tumor metabolism have been implicated in tumor progression and immune avoidance (Rubio-Patiño et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020). For example, competition between tumor cells and T cells for glucose leads to T cell hyporesponsiveness and tumor progression (Chang et al., 2015). While significant attention has been paid to the role of altered glucose metabolism in the setting of can-

cer, less has been devoted to the importance of lipids. In this issue of Cell, Ringel et al. find a mechanistic link between systemic lipid availability, local lipid utilization, and cancer progression (Figure 1). As observed previously, some tumor cell lines grow more rapidly and more aggressively in obese mice fed a high-fat diet than in lean mice fed a low-fat diet. However, this difference disappears in mice lacking T cells and is not apparent for tumor cell lines that are known to provoke minimal anti-tumor immunity. This suggested to the authors that altered T cell function contributes to the cancer-promoting effect of high-fat diet and obesity. Indeed, they found that in animals fed a high-fat diet, the number of CD8+ cytotoxic tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) is specifically reduced in the tumor microenvironment but not in other tissues or systemically, and those TILs that remain show fewer signals of activation (Ringel et al., 2020). Transcriptional analysis revealed that in mice fed high-fat diets, tumor cells increased expression of genes in pathways involving fatty acid oxidation and

reduced expression of glycolytic programs. Correspondingly, ex vivo tumor cells from obese mice took up more free fatty acid (FFA) than tumor cells from lean animals, suggesting that in the milieu created by obesity and a high-fat diet, tumor cells were rewired to preferentially take up and utilize lipids. Conversely, CD8+ TILs from high-fat-fed mice took up less fatty acid than those from lean, low-fat-fed animals. Lipidomics revealed a relative depletion of FFA in the tumor microenvironment of mice fed a high-fat diet. Together these findings suggest that a high-fat diet and/or obesity reprogram tumor cell metabolism, leading to depletion of local FFAs, which in turn reduces TILs’ anti-tumor activity. While the authors did not directly test whether the flux of fatty acids through TILs was reduced by a high-fat diet, they took advantage of a previous observation to manipulate mitochondrial fatty acid flux in tumor cells and test its effect on tumor growth. Prolyl hydroxylase 3 (PHD3), believed to negatively regulate mitochondrial importation and oxidation of long chain fatty acids (German et al., 2016), was downregulated in the tumor cells of
