[Page 1]

Wetting:

P. G. de Gennes College de France, Physique de la Matiere Condensee, 11 Place Marcelin-Berthelot, 7523 Paris Cedex 05, France

The wetting of solids by liquids is connected to physical chemistry (wettability), to statistical physics (pinning of the contact line, wetting transitions, etc. ), to long-range forces (van der Waals, double layers), and to fluid dynamics. The present review represents an attempt towards a unified picture with special emphasis on certain features of "dry spreading": (a) the final state of a spreading droplet need not be a monomolecular film; (b) the spreading drop is surrounded by a precursor film, where most of the available free energy is spent; and (c) polymer melts may slip on the solid and belong to a separate dynamical class, conceptually related to the spreading of superfluids.

CONTENTS I. Introduction II. Contact Angles A. Thermody namic equilibrium 1. Angles and energies: the Young condition 2. Spatial scales for the definition of a contact angle

3. Practical determinations of 8, 4. Special features of complete wetting

B.

Wettability 1. High-energy and low-energy surfaces 2. Standard behavior of high-energy surfaces 3. Low-energy surfaces and critical surface tensions C. Contact angle hysteresis Experiments 2. Models with parallel grooves 3 Random surfaces a. Weak fluctuations b. The wandering triple line c. Line pinning d. Effects of inhomogeneities in situations of complete wetting D. Wetting films and contact lines 1. Role of long-range forces a. van der Waals forces b. Double-layer forces 2. Final spreading equilibrium 3. Partial wetting: microscopic structure of contact

4. Special features of second-order transitions 5. Role of long-range forces a. Simple estimates of wetting film energies b. Limitations and improvements

c. Prewetting transitions 6. Impurity effects: facts and conjectures a. Facts b. Tentative interpretations IV. The Dynamics of Spreading A. Macroscopic measurements 1~

B. The precursor

2. Viscous losses in rolling motion a. Finite slippage at the solid surface b. van der Waals forces

3. Structure and dissipation in the precursor film a. Hydrodynamic equations b. The "maximal" film c. Crossover between the maximal film and the macroscopic droplet d. Truncated films e. Dissipation in the film 4. Spreading over a wet surface (Bretherton, 1961; Fritz, 1965; Tanner, 1979) a. Macroscopic regime b. Microscopic regime

a. Organic liquids: effects of van der Waals forces b. Water solutions: double-layer effects 4. "Complete" spreading: thickness of the wetting films

a. The "moist" case b. Nonvolatile

liquids (the "dry" case) vertical wall

c. Complete wetting:

III. The Wetting Transition A. Experiments on related systems Scope 2. Wetting films

3. Wetting transitions with consolute pairs

B. Theory The Cahn model 2. Determination of the surface density

Two types of wetting transitions a. First-order transitions b. Second-order transitions

Reviews of Modern Physics, Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

c. Spreading with obstacles D. The special case of polymer melts 1. Observations 2. Interpretat ion a. Strong slippage b. Droplet shapes (Brochard and de Gennes, 1984) c. The polymer precursor

film

C. Interpretation 1. Three types of dissipation

lines

Forced flow in a capillary

2. Spreading of a droplet

E.

F.

3. Perspectives Spreading laws for superfluid He& Unsolved problems Pure fluids 2. Effects of additives in the liquid a. Volatile impurities

b. Surfactants

c. Polymers Acknowledgments References Copyright

1985 The American

Physical Society

[Page 2]

I. INTROOUCTION

Many practical processes require the spreading of a liquid on a solid. The liquid may be a paint, a lubricant, an ink, or a dye. The solid may either show a simple surface or be finely divided (suspensions, porous media, fibers). Water, for instance, may be sucked into a porous soil, because it tends to wet the solid components of the soil Tertiary oil recuperation also involves the penetration of water into the channels of a porous rock, which were originally filled mainly by oil. The "flotation" of ores is based on selective wetting properties for the ore

particles. In spite of their importance, these processes are still poorly understood. (1) All interfacial effects are very sensitive to contaminants and to physical modifications of the surface (e.g. , steps, dislocations, if we are dealing with a crystalline solid}; this may explain why certain basic experiments (e.g. , spreading a single small droplet on a flat solid surface) have been fully carried out only recently. (2) The solid/liquid interfaces are much harder to probe than their solid/vacuum counterpart; essentially all experiments making use of electron beams become inapplicable when a fluid is present. A few sensitive techniques may still be applied specifically to the interface (fluorescence, EPR, etc. ), but they are often restricted to very specific Similar limitations occur with the electroexamples. chemical data. (3) On the theoretical side, 180 years after the pioneering work of Young and Laplace, a number of basic capillary problems are just beginning to be solved. parameters controlling the (a) The physicochemical thermodynamic wettability of solid surfaces were clarified through the long, careful efforts of Zisman (1964) and others (Fowkes, 1964; Padday, 1978), but the deviations from thermodynamic equilibrium are just beginning to be understood. Here I shall insist particularly on two such deviations the hysteresis of contact angles, due to the pinning of the contact line on localized defects, and the where the final state of a regimes of "dry spreading, spreading droplet is not necessarily a monomolecular layer, but may be a film of greater thickness. These relatively novel aspects are explained in Sec. II. (b) The transition from "complete wetting" to "partial wetting" (defined in Fig. 1 below), first predicted in 1977 (Cahn, 1977; Ebner and Saam, 1977), has become an active field of research and dispute (Sec. III). (c) The dynamics of spreading is delicate: a pioneering paper (Huh and Scriven, 1971) suggested a singularity in the dissipation, which provoked many discussions. Recently, a useful distinction has appeared between simple fluids, in which the liquid spreads by a rolling motion (Dussan and Davis, 1974), and polymer melts, which often tend to slip on a solid surface (Brochard and de Crennes, 1984). These two regimes (and the corresponding removal of singularities) are presented in Sec. IV. Our discussion does not include the local structure of the interfaces the arrangement of the atoms, or mole-

"

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

cules, at the 3-A scale near a boundary. For fluid/fluid interfaces, this aspect is, in fact, well reviewed in a recent book (Rowlinson and Widom, 1982). For solid/fluid interfaces our knowledge is still rather limited. In the present paper, the emphasis will be on behavior at somewhat larger scales (say 30 to 300 A}, where long-range forces (van der Waals, electrostatic, etc. ) become essential, control many practical features, and give rather universal properties. II. CONTACT ANG LES

A. Thermodynamic

equilibrium

1. Angles and energies: the Young condition When a small liquid droplet is put in contact with a flat solid surface, two distinct equilibrium regimes may be found: partial wetting [Figs. 1(a) and 1(b)] with a finite contact angle O„or complete wetting (8, =0) [Fig. 1(c)].' In cases of partial wetting, the wetted portion of the surface is delimited by a certain contact line W (which, for our droplets, is a circle). The situation near the contact line is represented more precisely in Fig. 2. Here we are dealing with a macroscopic wedge, and the line W is normal to the plane of the figure. Three phases are in contact at the line: the solid S, the liquid I., and the corresponding equilibrium vapor V. Each interface has a certain free energy per unit area yet, y~v, and yLv (the latter, for simplicity, will simply be called y). These parameters describe adequately the energy content of the interfaces in the far field (far from W). In the vicinity of W, the structure is much more complex and depends on a detailed knowledge of the system (examples of the complications that may occur are shown in Fig. 3). There is a "core region" around the nominal position of M, where the complications occur. It is possible, however, to relate 8, to the far-field energies y;J without any knowledge of the core This w.as one of the (many) discoveries of the British scientist Thomas Young

(1773—1829). The basic idea is to write that, in equilibrium, the energy must be stationary with respect to any shift (dx) of the

line position. In such a shift, (a) the bulk energies are unaffected (since the pressure is the same in the liquid and in the vapor); (b) the core energy is unaffected the core is simply translated; and (c) the areas of the far-field interfaces (for a unit length of line) are increased, respectively, by dx (for S/V), dx (for S/L), and cos8, dx

(for L/V). Hence the condition

fgy — pgL — p cosOe =0 .

'The subscript (e) in 0, refers to an equilibrium

property.

[Page 3]

P. G. de Gennes: Wetting: statics and dynamics

8e

ee

'I

+

+

+

)

+

(b)

+

//// / L/////g +

+

+

{c)

+

+

+

FIG. 3. Various types of core structures for the triple line. (a) Effect of attractive van der Waals forces. For 0, &&1, the profile is hyperbolic and the height h, of the perturbed region is of FICz. 1. A small droplet in equilibrium over a horizontal surface: (a) and (b) correspond to partial wetting, the trend towards wetting being stronger in (b) than in (a). (c) corresponds to complete wetting (8, =0).

order a/0, (where a is an atomic length). (b) A charged solid surface wetted by salty water (screening length ~D '). (c) Effect of the finite deformability of the solid. The width r, of the deformed region is r, -y/E (y, surface tension of the liquid; E, Young's modulus of the solid). For simplicity the special case O, =m. /2 has been drawn. (d) In the vicinity of a liquid/vapor critical point, the L/V interface becomes diffuse (thickness g) and the triple line has a core of radius r,

-g.

Equation (2. 1} shows that the angle 8, is entirely defined in terms of thermodynamic parameters: measurements on 8, give us certain information on the interfacial energies. Usually, we know yLv=y by separate measurements. Thus we are left with two unknowns (ysL, ys~) and only one datum (8, ). But it is only the difference ysz — ysL which is relevant for experiments involving the liquid.

(such as the droplets of Fig. 1), some weak curvatures are superimposed. interface may have a total curva(a) The liquid/vapor ture C =R '+R 2 ', and this is associated with a certain pressure difference between liquid and vapor: &

2. Spatial scales for the definition of a contact angle

pL

Equation (2. 1) was derived for a wedge (planar interfaces in the far field). For many practical applications

GORE

„.

gee

p&

The angle 8, is still well defined in this case, provided that the radii of curvature (R ~, R2) are much larger than the size (rc) of the core region (b} The line W itself may be curved, and, in this case, a of the line modifies the core energies. displacement Again, this leads to measurable effects only when the radius of curvature of the line is not too large, when compared to the core size rc [see, for instance, Platikhanov0 et al. (1980)]. In many practical examples rc &100 A. Thus, for most macroscopic experiments, where the droplets or the capillaries have sizes R —1 mm, all curvature corrections are negligible. A measurement of 0, at a distance r from the line, where

rc &&r &&R, should give a well-defined

0„ independent

of r.

SOL. FIG. 2. Translation of a liquid wedge (triple line M) by an amount dx. The energy is unchanged in this process, and this leads to the Young equation (2. 1). Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

Equation (2.2) is also due to Young (1804) and rediscovered independently one year later by Laplace.

was

[Page 4]

3. Practical determinations

of 0,

The angle 8, can be obtained (a) from a direct photograph, (b) through the reflection (or deflection) of rays by the liquid prism of Fig. 2, (c) by interferential techniques (Callaghan et al. , 1983), especially for small 8„(d) from the rise of a liquid column in a fine capillary (Fig. 4); for a general discussion of the various capillary effects, see the classical book by Bouasse (1924) and the recent tutorial article of Guyon et al. (1982). In actual experiments the main difficulty is to avoid a certain pinning of the triple line W on defects of the solid surface. This pinning leads to a hysteresis of the contact angles, which can very seriously obscure the determination of 0, . Clearly, to avoid pinning one requires solid surfaces that are smooth and chemically homogeneous, but the question is, what level of smoothness do we require to reduce the uncertainty in 0, below a prescribed limit 60? A partial answer to this question is given in

Sec. II.C. 4. Special features of complete wetting Equation (2. 1) gives cos8, as a function energies. The special case 'V

it should be gamma_SV can never be larger than gamma_SL+g amma, right?

of interfacial

On the other hand, if we deal with nonequilibrium situations, we may have a solid/vapor interfacial energy yso that is larger than ysL +y. The difference

S = 3'so —TsL —7

is called the spreading coefficient. Physically, @so is associated with a "dry" solid surface, while ysy is associated with a "moist" surface. For some systems the differWith water on metallic oxides, ence is enormous. yso —yet. -300 ergs/cm; with organic liquids on oxides, @so ysz-60 ergs/cm . On the other hand, with organic liquids on molecular solids, the difference (as seen via contact angles) is perceptible only when the liquid is very light and volatile. For instance, with normal alcanes on a Teflon surface, the angles 80 (on dry Teflon) and 8, (in equilibrium with the vapor) are found to differ only when the carbon number n of the alcane is (Zisman, 1964). The importance of the spreading coefficient (2.3) for practical purposes was first recognized by Cooper and Nuttal (1915) in connection with the spraying of insecticides on leaves. Large positive S favors the spreading of a liquid. There remains, however, a fundamental ambiguity in cases where the experimentalist observes complete spreading on macroscopic scales: he cannot tell whether S =0 or S &0. For the "moist" case, we know that 8, =0 (or that the corresponding S —0) because the system "locks in" at this value, as explained at the beginning of this section. But for the "dry" case there is no "lock-in" process, and we expect that complete spreading will usually be associated with a positive S. How large is S? We shall see in Sec. II.D that the answer may sometimes be obtained by probing the thickness of the ultimate wetting film achieved in spreading: the smaller the S, the larger the equilibrium thickness, in qualitative agreement with the trend noticed by Cooper and Nuttal.

(5

„„=

= 1'sv —FsL

leads to cos8, =1 or 8, =0 (complete wetting). At first sight, this situation appears rather exceptional. In fact, it is not, because ysL+y can never be larger than y~v (in thermodynamic equilibrium). If it were larger, this would imply that the free energy of a solid/vapor interface (ygv) could be lowered by intercalating a liquid film of macroscopic thickness (energy yet + y ). The equilibrium solid/vapor interface then automatically comprises suc'h a film, and the true ysv is identical to ysL+y, i.e., we have complete wetting in this regime.

R,

Ig FIG. 4. Capillary rise:

in a thin capillary the meniscus is a spherical cap of radius R = R /cosO, . The Young-Laplace capillary pressure 2y/R is balanced by the hydrostatic component pgh (p, density difference between liquid and vapor, g, gravitational constant). Thus a measurement of h gives 0, .

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July 1985

B. Wettability Our aim in this section is to understand qualitatively how the contact angle 0, depends on the chemical constitution of both the solid S and the liquid L. The basic reference here is still the review by Zisman (1964).

1. High-energy and low-energy surfaces Let us discuss the solid first. From studies on the bulk cohesive energy we know that there are two main types of solids, (a) hard solids (covalent, ionic, or metallic), and (b) weak molecular crystals (bound by van der Waals forces, or in some special cases, by hydrogen bonds). A similar classification is found from the solid/vacuum surface energies (Fox and Zisman, 1950). Hard solids have "highenergy surfaces" (yso —500 to 5000 ergs/cm ), while molecular solids (and also molecular liquids) have "lowenergy surfaces" (yzo —50 ergs/cm ).

[Page 5]

2. Standard behavior of high-energy Most

molecular

surfaces

achieve complete wetting surfaces. Let us try to understand this in simple terms, assuming that hard bonds control yso, while van der Waals interactions control the liquid/solid energies (no chemical binding between liquid and solid). This amounts to writing for the solid/liquid liquids

(S&0) with high-energy

energy YsL

Yso + )

sL

( ~sl

Here the term —VsL describes the attractive van der Waals (VW) interactions between solid and liquid near the surface. Equation (2.4) can be understood if we progressively bring into contact the regions S and L; when they are well separated (by an empty slab), the energy is ysz+y; when we establish contact, we recover the energy —VsI. . Very similarly, by bringing into contact two liquid portions, we start with an energy 2y, and end up with zero interfacial energy,

0=2y —VL~

( VLL

&0),

In some cases we find complete wetting for the whole series. This occurs, for instance, for liquid alcanes against solid polyethylene. But in other cases we find a finite contact angle O„varying within the homologous series. A useful way of representing these results is to plot cos8, versus the surface tension y of the liquid. (An example is shown in Fig. 5.) Although, in many cases, we never reach cosO, =1, i.e., we never reach complete wetting, we can extrapolate the plot down to a value y=yc, which would correspond to cos0, =1. The details of the extrapolation produced differ from author to author (in the pioneering work of Zisman a linear extrapolation was used), but this is not essential. In general, we would expect yc to depend on the solid S, but to depend also on the liquid series L. However, when dealing with simple molecular liquids (where van der Waals forces are dominant), Zisman observed that yc is essentially independent of the nature of the liquid, and is a characteristic of the solid alone. Typical values are listed below:

ergs/cm

where —VLL represents the LL attractions. Using Eqs. (2.4) and (2.5), we find that the spreading parameter S, defined in Eq. (2.3), is equal to

S = —2y+ Vsg —VsL —VLL and the condition

of complete wetting (S & 0) corresponds

to

VsL~ V

It is also possible to translate (2.6) in terms of the dielectric polarizabilities as (aL) for the solid (liquid). To a first approximation the VW couplings between two species (i) and (j) are simply proportional to the product

Nylon

P. Vinyl chloride P. Ethylene PVF2 PVF4

If we want to find a molecular liquid that wets completely a given low-energy surface, we must choose a liquid of surface tension y & yz. Thus yc may be called a "critical surface tension" and is clearly the essential parameter for many practical applications. Can we relate y~ to some simple physical parameters of the solid? This has been attempted by various authors

of the corresponding polarizabilities

kaga~, VJ — where k is (roughly) independent

)l

cos e&

of (i) and (j). Then the

condition (2.6) reduces to

as &a

(2.g)

Thus high-energy surfaces are wetted by molecular liquids, not because ysz is high, but rather because the solid usually has a polarizability underlying as much higher than the polarizability of the liquid. Of course, these considerations are very rough (the frequency dependence of the a's should be taken into account), but they still provide us with some guidance.

3. Low-energy surfaces and critical surface tensions Low-energy surfaces can give rise to partial or to complete wetting, depending on the liquid chosen. In a complex situation like this, it is natural to choose a series of homologous liquids (for instance, the n-alcanes) and to study how they wet a given solid. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

0.8—

FIG. 5. A typical Zisman

p (ergs/cm2)

plot (cosine of equilibrium

angle

vs surface tension) for a polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon) surface in contact with liquid n-alkanes (after Fox and Zisman, 1950). The critical surface tension y, for this system is 18 ergs/cm .

[Page 6]

(Girifalco and Good, 1957; Fowkes, 1962; Good, 1964). In the present review, we shall present only a naive argument, following the simple "van der Waals model" of (2.7) and always assuming that the polarizabilEqs. (2.4) — ity yv of the vapor is negligible. This amounts to writing

cos0, =

7s&

PsL

Vso

V sL

2lxs

—1.

CXL

When we compare different chemicals within the same homologous series, we vary aL. For instance, with alcanes, the polarizability of the terminal (CH3) groups is of the — higher than the polarizability CH2 —groups: shorter alcanes have larger eL values. The value of aL at which cos0, extrapolates to 1 is

&LC=O'S .

If we

y=

in

terms

of surface

tensions

——, kaL, we may write Eq. (2.9) in the form '

.

c= ~s

1. Experiments

of the thermodynamic contact angle clean experimental conditions. In many practical situations, one finds that the triple line W is pinned, and immobile, not only for 0= 0, but whenever 0 lies within a finite interval around The determination

1/2

Vc

cos0, =2

C. Contact angle hysteresis

to work

prefer

—, VI L

Snook and Van Megen, 1979,1980), but some more time will be required before we extract from it some really general rules and trends. Let us now return to the practical aspects, and comment upon the values of yc that have been listed above. (a) The system of high yc (nylons, PVC) are those most wettable by organic liquids. They carry rather strong permanent dipoles. (b) Among systems that are controlled by VW interactions, we note that CF2 groups are less wettable less polarizable) than CH2 groups. In practice, many protective coatings (antistain, waterproofing, etc. ) are based on fl uorinated systems. (c) It is possible to study specifically the wetting properties of terminal groups CF3 —or CH3 —by depositing a surfactant monolayer on a polar solid surface (Fig. 6). For CH3 groups yL —24 ergs/cm, and for CF3 pc is 6 ergs/cm~). For more details on all amazingly small ( — these fascinating questions, we again refer the reader to the beautiful review by Zisman (1964).

(~

—y

Vsr

(2. 1 1)

y.

requires

very

0„

Equation (2. 12) does show that yc depends only on the properties of the solid and is an increasing function of its polarizability. Numerically, Eq. (2. 12) is not good, and various lines of improvement have been pursued. forces contribute (a) In practice to the many so1id/liquid interactions dipolar, hydrogen bonds, etc. Thus one adds more terms in the decomposition (2.4), each force giving its contribution to Vsq and to VLL (see, for instance, Good, 1964). In such a case yc may depend slightly on the nature of the liquids chosen to define it. (b) Even when VW forces only are present, the simple expression (2.7) of the interaction in terms of some average po1arizabilities is too primitive. More precise theories incorporate the frequency dependence of the polarizabilities, following the lines of the Lifshitz calculation of VW forces (Qwens et al. , 1978). We shall not insist on these points, but mention that there exists (at least) a third group of corrections. (c) The density distribution and the pair correlations in the liquid are modified near the solid surface, and these modifications may be quite different from what they are at the free surface of the liquid. For instance, recent work by Israelashvili (1982) and others shows that the forces between two closely spaced (20 A) solid surfaces, through a liquid, are often oscillatory in sign, suggesting a one-particle density function in the liquid, which oscillates as a function of the distance to the solid. Computer work on these structures has begun (see, for instance,

0, (0(0, . The angle solid/liquid

0, (advancing

angle) is measured when the contact area increases, while 8, (receding an-

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

SO L. CF3

(cF, ),

CO2

FIG. 6. Idealized structure of a surfactant monolayer attached to a polar solid. The particular example chosen provides one of the least wettable surfaces ever found.

[Page 7]

P. G. de Gennes: Wetting: statics and dynamics

or absence of the film can, in some cases, lead to hysteretic effects. In many cases the film, once formed, is stuck on the solid surface. See, for instance, Chappuis (1984).

2. Models with parallel grooves

FIG. 7. Definition of the advancing (0, ) and receding gles for a liquid on a nonideal solid surface.

(8„) an-

gle) is measured when the contact area shrinks (Fig. 7). The interval 8, 8, may be 10 or more for surfaces that have not been specially prepared. What is the source of this hysteresis? Three major causes have been invoked. Ea. rly observations (a) Surface roughness by Trillat and Fritz (1937) showed that the triple line W was easily trapped when parallel to a system of grooves. Among the more recent experiments, those by Dettre and Johnson (1964) deserve special mention because they were performed with a series of solid surfaces of increasing roughness. A typical set of data is shown in Fig. 8. It exhibits a remarkable, nonmonotonous variation of 6I, with the degree of roughness, to which we shall return later. Further systematic studies were carried out by Mason (1978). (b) Chemical contaminations, or inhomogeneities, in the solid surface may als6 play an important role. Some of the experiments of Dettre and Johnson (1964) were made with glass beads immersed in paraffin wax, and the differences in wettability between glass and paraffin may have contributed to the hysteresis. But systematic studies of purely chemical effects at a smooth surface are still

lacking. (c) So!utes in the liquid (surfactants, polymers, etc. ) may deposit a film on the solid surface, and the presence

Early discussions on the effects of surface roughness were restricted to periodic surfaces for instance, with a parallel set of grooves (Johnson and Dettre, 1964; Mason, 1978; Cox, 1983). These systems have some reality a classical example is a phonograph record (Oliver et al. ,

1977). When the triple line W is parallel to the grooves, it may have a number of pinned positions (described in Fig. 9), and it is possible to compute numerically the magnitude of the energy barriers between two such positions. Some aspects of these calculations are very artificial (the energy barriers are proportional to the total length of line

,

(b)

JL EE

( OEEIIEES )

100—

50— n =1Q

IOQQNIE$$

n=p

FIG. 8. Advancing and receding angles for water on fluorocarbon wax: a rough surface is obtained by spraying the wax. It is then made smoother by heating in an oven. The numbers n on the horizontal scale (0, 1.0, 10) refer to the number of successive heat treatments. Notice the abrupt jump of O„between n =6 and n =7 (after Dettre and Johnson, 1964). Rev. Mod. Phys. , VoI. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

FIG. 9. (a) Equilibrium positions of a contact line W (normal to the sheet) on a system of grooves. M&, W&, are locally stable, while W' is unstable. 0, is the thermodynamic contact angle. 0, is the macroscopic angle. (b) The creep process for a contact line M moving from position W~ to position M2. C stands for "crest" and T for "trough.

"

[Page 8]

Ll Q.

SOL.

FIG. 10. A "composite" structure, between

liquid

and solid, when

with vapor bubbles trapped the solid has deep, paralle1

grooves.

involved), but some aspects are instructive. For instance, when the grooves are rather deep, it may happen that vapor bubbles remain locked in the troughs and are covered by the liquid (Fig. 10). The resulting "composite structures" are then predicted to display much smaller barriers. The minimum of 0, are a function of roughness, observed in various systems by Dettre and Johnson (1964), has been interpreted along these lines: When we increase the roughness, we first find a normal increase of the barrier heights and a corresponding decrease of 0„' but when the troughs become deep enough, we obtain a composite structure, with weaker barriers, and 0„ increases. Note, finally, that the groove systems show an extremeWhen the line M is parallel to the ly strong anisotropy. grooves, it is pinned. When M lies (on the average) at a certain angle P from the grooves, it has the local structure shown in Fig. 11, and W can be displaced continuously

without any pinning (Cox, 1983). Experiments have been carried out for the special case /=90' and indeed show no pinning (Mason, 1978). In fact, the cascade of "jogs" displayed in Fig. 11 also gives us a hint about the physical processes that take place when W is parallel to the grooves (/=0). At /=0 the line wants to jump from one crest (W~} to the next (Mz}, as explained in Fig. 9(a). But the optimal method of doing this is not an overall jump (which would correspond to a huge barrier energy). What should really happen (in an infinite sample, with no edge effects) is shown in Fig. 9(b): nucleation of two "jogs" of opposite sign, followed by a glide of each jog along the grooves, until the (W2) strip spans the whole crest. Thus the physical barrier energy is independent of sample size, and is related to the nucleation and depairing of two adjacent jogs. This statement holds when the grooves are infinitely long (or close on themselves, as they would in a capillary with grooves normal to the axis). If the grooves have a finite length (e.g. , on a grooved plate}, then a single jog may easily nucleate at the end of the groove and sweep through it. This process was discovered in recent numerical studies by Garoff and Schwartz (private communication).

3. Random surfaces a Weak fluctuations A natural extension of the groove models is the case of surfaces that have a double periodicity, e.g. , two orthogonal sets of grooves (Cox, 1983). However, it is clear that the major physical problem in this case corresponds to a random surface (random shape, or random chemical composition}. This situation is, of course, more difficult. A first step, to make it simpler, is to focus on cases of weak To ex.plain what this means quantitatively, fluctuations let us start with a flat surface, but allow for chemical contamination. This will be described in terms of the local interfacial energies ys&. (x,y), ysL(x, y) at the point (x,y) on the surface What .matters is the difference ysv — ysL, or, more accurately, the fluctuating part rsL ~ where the angular brackets denote a space average. The local contact angle H(x, y) at point (x,y) is given by the Young condition (2. 1), lt

/

/

/

/ /

/

(xy) =rsv

~rs—

ysL

r c»H=i +&1 sv

For small FICi. 11. A triple line W at an oblique angle (tt } from a system of grooves (the crests and troughs are marked C and T, respectively). The overall pattern can be translated along the groove direction without any energy change (no pinning). Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

~—

~—

angle l9O is ruled by

while the unperturbed y cosHp= & rsi

rsL

rsL

h we may thus write

h (x,y)

y sinOO

and the condition or, equivalently,

for weak fluctuations

—Hp

is &&sinHp, imposing

—Hp

((Hp

[Page 9]

h (x,y }

« y sin

Op

.

We shall assume that Eq. (2. 18) holds in most of our discussion. This automatically eliminates certain interesting features (e.g. , the "composite structures" mentioned earnonlinear effects are still lier), but many important present in this limit. [Remark: A further (convenient) simplification to be made here is to require that Oo itself be small, Oo ~& 1. All calculations become simpler in this limit, without losing much physical content. ] Having defined weak fluctuations for chemical contamination, let us now turn to the case of surface roughness. Here the height of the interface at point (x,y) differs from the ideal value by a correction u (x,y). We assume that the slopes E =Bu/Bx, c~ =Bu/By are small. A systematic analysis of the effects to order E has been carried out by Cox (1983). Here we shall restrict our attention to the lowest significant order (E). Let us define our axes (x,y) in the plane of average interface, so that the average contact line W is parallel to x. The "liquid side" is chosen to be the half-plane y &0 (Fig. 12}. Then the major effect at any point is the rotation of the local surface, The along an axis parallel to x, by an angle cy interface makes an angle Op with the tilted liquid/vapor surface, but makes an angle

b. The wandering

triple line

Having defined the irregularities of the surface through a certain random function h (x,y), we wish to understand how these irregularities react on the shape of the triple line W. This has been attempted independently by Pomeau and Vannimenus (1984) and by Joanny and de Gennes (1984). The two approaches supplement each other, the first being more rigorous and the second giving certain physical insights. A first step is to study a deformed line W [specified by a position y =g(x) on the average surface] and to construct the elastic energy of the line. At first sight one might think of a line tension u, giving an energy

"" dx

f„=f '~

dx

the Fourier transform g~ of is wrong, and should be

where we have introduced

g(x). The form (2.21) however, replaced by

f,i= '}'~op —e

Q=oo+c =0O+Bu/By

I'.

ri

(2.22}

with the average boundary plane (Fig. 12). Comparing Eqs. (2. 19) and (2. 17), we see that the surface roughness problem and the chemical contamination problem coincide (to first order in E), provided that we set

—h (x,y)~) OpBu/By

«

1). (for Op The detailed statistical features of the random function h(xy) depend on the particular system under consideration. In what follows, we shall restrict our attention to cases where h (xy) is a random noise function with an amplitude h and a finite correlation range g. This is probably adequate for many types of chemical contamination and for certain forms of surface roughness (e.g. , induced by abrasion}. But the assumption may break down for certain specia1 systems. For instance, as pointed out by Huse (private communication), if the solid is a glass, and if it has retained the thermal fluctuations of the surface it had as a melt, the surface u (xy) is "rough" in the particular sense of statistical mechanics, and exhibits some anomalous long-range correlations.

LI Q

dependence for a mode of Physically, the usual wavelength 2m. /q expresses the fact that the line distortion interface on a thickness q perturbs the liquid/vapor Integrating a capillary energy (proportional to q ) over this thickness, we get Eq. {2.22). described by Let us now add the inhomogeneities h (x,y}. They contribute an energy

f;= f dx f

dyh(x, y) .

We may equivalently say that h = cal force acting on the line W,

lo5f;/5'(x) is the —

f (x) = [x, (x ] .

r)

)

We must now balance the elastic force [linear in the displacements g(x)] against the random force (2.24). But the random force is itself a (nonlinear) function of g. This point, emphasized by Pomeau and Vannimenus, makes the discussion quite delicate. Here, we shall use an due to Huse {1984), which illuminating presentation, parallels a classic idea of Imry and Ma (1975), improved later by Grinstein and Ma (1983) for the discussion of random field effects in ferromagnets. We consider a piece of line of macroscopic length l, which is pinned at both ends,

g(x =0) =g(x =I) =0 .

Let us look for the ground-state energy of the line, assuming that it is characterized by a fluctuation amplitude

SOL. FICs. 12. Effect of a local tilt of the surface on the apparent contact angle l9. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

g(x)- W (0&x &1) . The corresponding elastic energy i ', and is (2.22) with q —

is derived

from

Eq.

[Page 10]

f, —l yOol 'W = )'HOW

(x= xd, y)

The energy f; associated with the random force h can be estimated simply in two limits. (i) If W&g the line meets l/g uncorrelated inhomogeneities, each with random forces +h. The overall force is of order v'1/gh, and the energy is

f; = —Whv'l/g'

.

When this is added to Eq. (2.27), we find an optimum placement

W-

too

v'l/g .

dis-

This law has been quoted by Pomeau and Vannimenus (1984) and Joanny and de Gennes (1984a), but it is restricted to W & g, or, equivalently, h &y80v'g/l

.

f; ——hg (Wl/g )'/ ——hgv'Wl, and

the

optimum

yg2

(X = Xd, y)

(ii) If W~g, the line, when moving from its unperturbed position (i)=0), has swept a ribbon of area Wl, The recontaining Wl jg uncorrelated inhomogeneities. sulting energy is

f, +f„, is

W,

obtained

by

h(x=xd, y)

minimization

of

' 2/3

l i /3g2/3

For most practical purposes, this second case is adequate, and the Huse formula (2.32) should hold. Taking l = 1 mm, h =ygo, and g= 1 pm, we get W =10 p, m.

FIG. 13. Examples of smooth defect structures: (a) a chemical contaminant localized near one point (xd, yd ) creates a localized peak in h(xy); (b) a bump on the surface, described by u(xy), induces an h function proportional to the derivative Bu /By.

c. Line pinning In the preceding section we considered only one (optimal) shape for the contact line M. However, to describe hysteresis, we must compare different shapes. To understand the competition between two shapes, let us first consider a single "defect, following the arguments of Joanny and de Gennes (1984a). The word "defect" means a perturbation h(x, y) localized near a particular point (x~,yd) and with finite linear dimensions b, x-by =d. Typical forms are shown in Fig. 13. The contact line W may have more than one equilibrium position near such a defect. In certain regimes it can become "anchored" to the defect as shown in Fig. 14. Far from the defect, the line coincides with y =yL. Just on the defect (x =xd), the line is shifted and reaches a certain value of y =y An essential parameter is the total force i exerted by the defect on the line,

"

&m'

3This is an upper limit. Beyond that size gravitational come into play. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

energies

FICr. 14. A contact line W anchored on a defect. The defect is restricted to a small region (of diameter d), but the line is perturbed much farther out.

[Page 11]

f —f dx [x, +ri(x)] .

The integral

by the central

'q ~&m&

yL

(2.33) is dominated

region by the

[x -x~, g(x) -y — yL ] and will be approximated

simpler form

fi(y )=

dx h(xiy

)

.

For a given defect structure, fi(y ) is then a known function of y — yd (Fig. 15). A simple example, to

~y

Yd

which we shall sometimes refer, is a Gaussian defect

(x — xd ) + (y — yd )

h (x,y) =ho exp

In this case the force

2d

fi(y is also Gaussian: )

fi(y )=(2n) /2 hod exp

2d2

Let us now consider the line tip (x =xd, y =y~). The line here is in equilibrium under two forces, the force i defined in Eq. (2.34), and an elastic restoring force, which tends to bring y back to the unperturbed line position yL. This elastic force can be derived from the elastic energy (2.22). It has the simple Hooke form

f.i=k(yL, —y»

where k may be called the spnng constant is given by

of the line and

k= my00

ln( /d)

Here l is a long-distance cutoff (for the single-defect problem, l would be the total length of line available), and d is always the defect size. The nice feature of Eq. (2.38) is that k is nearly independent of all defect properties. The balance of forces then gives the fundamental equation

—m) =fi(y»,

which is solved graphically

in Fig. 15. When the strength

of the defect [measured by ho in Eq. (2.35)] is small, there is only one root y for any specified yL, ', we have no hysteresis. On the other hand, when the strength ho is

(y

YL

Y~

ym

-y)

ym

FICx. 15. Equilibrium positions for the anchoring point (y =y ) of the line on the defect. The position of the line far from the defect is imposed (y =yL, ). For a given yI there may be three equilibrium positions; two of these (y', y ") are locally stable. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

k(y

FIG. 16. An example of a "mesa" defect. The function h (xg) is zero, except in a circle of radius d around the point (xdy~), where it is constant (h =hp). Then the force ~(y ) has the aspect shown. Even for very weak ho there exist two competing equilibrium positions (at y" and yL, ), when yL is just to the left of point A: hysteresis is always present. beyond a certain threshold, we can find three roots (for a certain interval of yL values); then we expect hysteresis. This brings us to a very important conclusion for "regular" defects, i.e., for cases when fi(y ) is a smooth function [with a finite derivative fi(y~)]. We see that weak perturbations create strictly no hysteresis: to have a angle O„we good determination of the thermodynamic do not need an ideal surface; we need only a surface with irregularities below a certain threshold. The case of "mesa" defects (where the function h has is completely different (Fig. 16). step discontinuities) With mesa defects we can have hysteresis even for very small h functions. (Mesa structures can be obtained, for instance, with fatty acids on glass; see Brockway and Jones, 1964.) The mesa case was the only one considered (1984). For this reason, by Pomeau and Vannimenus some of their conclusions on the magnitude of the macroscopic hysteresis are somewhat specialized. Up to now we have discussed only a single defect. It is not too hard, however, to extend the arguments to a dilute system of defects, and to produce detailed formulas for the hysteresis parameters 8, and 8„(Joanny and de Gennes, 1984a). The only nontrivial point in this extenof the spring constant k [Eq. sion is a renormalization (2.38)]: here the cutoff length l becomes the average distance between defects, as seen by the line W. If n is the number of defects/cm,

1~(nd) There is good hope of comparing these predictions with experiments performed on controlled defects, with sizes in the 10-pm range. They can be prepared by film deposition, using the many techniques currently in use in microelectronics. One can arrange to have either diffuse edges ("regular" defects) or sharp edges ("mesa" defects), and one can purposely locate these defects at random on a

At much smaller sizes (below 1000 A) the barriers between the equilibrium positions may be overcome by thermal agitation.

[Page 12]

given surface. Measurements systems should provide much basic laws of hysteresis. d. Effects of inhomogeneities of complete wetting

of contact angles

in such

more information

on the

in this regime.

b. Oouble-layer

If the liquid L is water, or more generally an ionic solution (of screening length a'p ), the solid will usually create in the water a charge double layer, of thickness KD . Since water has a high dielectric constant E =- 80, —1, the electric field must while the vapor phase has E= (nearly) vanish at the liquid/gas interface. This means that the double layer is repelled by an electrostatic image. The asymptotic form of this repulsion at large g was computed long ago by Langmuir (1938) and Frumkin (1938). The "disjoining pressure ' H is exponential,

= C exp( —2x Dg) (I~D( & 1),

All our previous discussion dealt with macroscopic scales (larger than 1 pm). We now want to investigate smaller scales (say from 30 A to 1 pm), where a continuum picture is still applicable, but where certain long-range forces become relevant, mainly van der Waals (VW) forces for organic liquids, or double-layer forces for water. (Classical reviews on these forces were given long ago et al. , 1961; Overbeek and Van by Dzyaloshinskii Silfhout, 1967; and Lyklema, 1967). Let us call P(g) the long-range tail of the energy/cm of a flat liquid film of thickness g, lying on the solid. It is related to the celebrated "disjoining pressure" Il(g) introduced by Deryagin (1940) and reviewed in Deryagin (1955; see also Deryagin and Churaev, 1976), via II = dP/dg,

A lucid discussion of our present knowledge of the function 11(g), for various liquids and various substrates, and of its application to dynamical studies has been given by Teletzke, Davis, and Scriven (1984). In what follows we extract only some relatively simple limiting cases.

a. van der Waals forces

B/(3g ) (g~ k; retarded) .

We shall restrict our attention to the case where the constants A and 8 are positive. This means that VW forces Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

)

the

Here $0 is the potential at the solid surface, n is the numin the water, and e is the unit charge. ber of ions/cm Comparisons between Eqs. (2.43), (2.44), and ellipsometric data on water films have been carried out by Callaghan and Baldry (1978). They find that Eq. (2.44) does not give a very good fit to their data, and use some more complicated models. In the regime aDg& 1 the experimental data are somethat (1980) concludes what Pashley surprising. 11(g)- 0 ' (for water on glass or silica} in the region g & 400 A. There is no obvious theoretical explanation for this slow decrease. On the other hand, the data reviewed by Israelashvili (1982), on double-layer forces between two closely spaced mica plates, do agree with the standard theory and thus with Eq. (2.44}, in the large thickness limit. In any case, to obtain simple predictions on thick wetting films and contact lines, the form (2.44) is a natural starting point.

2. Final spreading equilibrium

It will be much simpler to discuss a one-dimensional problem where the liquid thickness g depends only on one coordinate x in the plane of the solid surfaces (Fig. 17). The ingredients in the free energy are listed below:

min

(g & k; nonretarded)

ions, such as Na+ and Cl

f =f0+ J -"« —S+ —

Here we have two regimes: A /(12m/2)

(2.43}

C = 64 nkvd T fanh( l//Oe /kg T)

Role of long-range forces

P( )='

forces

where (for monovalent prefactor is

D. Wetting films and contact lines

P(g)= 1' "dg II(g') .

tend to thicken the liquid film (the "agonist" case in the nomenclature of de Gennes, 1983). The crossover length is roughly related to a characteristic ultraviolet A, =A. /2m absorption wavelength A, of the medium, and is of order

800 A.

in situations

The above discussion was concerned with cases where S &0 (partial wetting), allowing for finite contact angles. What happens in the opposite case, where S is positive (complete wetting) but varies from point to point? This has been discussed recently (de Gennes, 1984e). It turns out that the final state of a droplet in dry spreading can be quite complex. The regions of high S are wet, while the regions of low S are not. The final thickness e of a macroscopic droplet adjusts itself so that the dry "islands" are just at their percolation threshold (i.e. , at the onset of a continent). These considerations also suggest that many hysteretic effects could take place in dry spreading, but (to the author's knowledge) we do not have any experimental observations

'2

1x

+P(g)+G(g}

(x;„,x,

Here „) represent the interval covered by liquid. S is defined by Eq. (2.3) for the "dry" case, and by a similar rule (replacing yso by ysv) for the "moist" case. The

[Page 13]

(Y)

(x) +

'

min+

+

max+

FIG. 17. The final "pancake" in complete dry spreading (S &0). Contrary to common belief, the equi1ibrium state is not a molecular film. Whenever S~&y the thickness e is larger than the molecular size a.

of the length eleinent small (this will turn out to be the most interesting regime). The long-range forces show up in P(g). Note that P(g~ao)=0. The interfacial energies S and y appearing in Eq. (2.45} are the thermodynamic values, valid for thick films (gazoo). They do incorporate contributions from the long-range forces. Finally G(g) describes gravitational and hydrostatic effects. These effects are often negligible for microscopic studies on contact lines and wetting films, but they show up in some special cases, and we keep them for this

= (G+P) Yso

~min

+

FIG. 18. The balance of forces on a liquid portion near the contact line W.

y term results from an expansion ds

=dx +dg, assuming dg/dx

reason:

G(g) =pg(g'/2+gH),

where p is the density difference between liquid and gas, g is the gravitational acceleration, and the H term has different meanings depending on the case being considered. (a) For the "moist" case, the very existence of a liquid/vapor equilibrium requires thatin , the experimental cell, a macroscopic reservoir of bulk liquid be present and in contact with the vapor. Then H is the difference in level between the solid plate and the liquid surface in the reservoir. (b) For the "dry" case, the total volume of the spreading droplet, 0, is fixed (no exchange), and we may think of the quantity

PgH Po = —

as a Lagrange multiplier associated with this condition. After finding the droplet shape, imposing 0 fixes po. The minimization of Eq. (2.45) with respect to g(x) leads to a standard equilibrium condition,

dP

d g

dG

dx' which has an important

first integral,

dg dx

=P(g}+G(g)

S.

— (2.49)

The value of the integration constant is best understood from the balance of horizontal forces shown in Fig. 18. Let us consider, for instance, a fluid region extending up to a value of g where long-range forces are negligible [P(g)=0]. The fluid region experiences on the right the forces y cosy+ysL (capillary) and G(g) (hydrostatic). To the left we have the force yqo. Noting that Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

cosy= 1 ——,(dg/dx)

we recover (2.49). The calculation of all droplet shapes g(x) can now be performed by simple quadratures. We

shall apply this scheme in the following section.

3. Partial wetting: microscopic structure of contact lines a. Organic liquids: effects of van der Waals forces Let us now consider the case of a nonzero contact angle

8, (8, «1). In this case,

We insert this value in Eq. (2.49) and discuss the core structure of the contact line W. In the vicinity of the contact line (Fig. 18) we may ignore gravitational forces as well as the macroscopic pressure difference po. Setting G =0 in Eq. (2.49), we then is negative.

have

—8, =2y 'P(g) .

For most practical purposes here, the nonretarded form of P(g) [Eq. (2.44)] is adequate; we then define a molecular length a, a =A/(6m. y) .

Solving Eq. (2.52) explicitly, we find a hyperbolic form,

g =(8,x) +(a/8, )

Results equivalent to Eq. (2.54) for g»a were first obtained by Berry (1974). See also Joanny and de Gennes (1984b). Of course Eq. (2.54) is meaningful only in the reor equivalently g»a. But, for gions where dg/dx the hyperbolic profile extends to small contact angles thicknesses g-a8, ', which can be of order 100 A, and is thus significant. The limiting case 8, =0 (complete wetting) should also be mentioned at this point. Integrating (2.52) for this case, we reach a parabolic shape,

«1, 8„

g' =2a (x —x, ) (a & g & X) .

Beyond k we must switch to the retarded form for P(g),

[Page 14]

and we find a slightly different exponent,

g'=By '[ —;(x—xL )]

interactions often prevail. On the other hand, the limit =0 does not seem to have been experimentally explored (it could be easily controlled by interference techniques). It would lead to very thick films (e —10 pm) and to a rather direct determination of retarded VW forces:

(g & A. ) .

Ultimately, when g gets large, the gravitational/hydrostatic terms G(g) come into play. One then returns to macroscopic physics (see Bouasse, 1924}. The profile for the opposite (and probably less frequent) case of antagonist VW forces (A &0 and 8, finite) has been discussed by Wayner (1982).

e(H =0)=(B/pg)'

b. Water solutions:

double-layer

effects

If we insert Eq. (2.43) into Eq. (2.52), we find the modified wedge structure illustrated in Fig. 3(b): the local contact angle 8& near M tends to be larger than the thermodynamic angle 8, . If we use Eq. (2.43) down to low values of the thickness g, we get

2P (0)

(&)

)I

( I) .

Equation (2.57) is only indicative. In actual fact, at small g the exponential form (2.43) does not hold, and the VW terms may play a role as well. But, independently of these details, the perturbation around g=lrD, indicated in Fig. 3(b), is meaningful. Here again, the special case of complete wetting deserves a special mention. For 8, =0, Eq. (2. 52) gives a logarithmic profile:

g=KD ln[1+xaD

(} /C)'

]

Just as in the case of van der Waals forces, this holds only in the microscopic regime. Ultimately, at large g, the and hydrostatic terms become dominant, gravitational and we return to standard macroscopic forms.

4. "Complete" spreading: thickness of the wetting films

Here a spreading droplet ultimately becomes a flat "pancake, and we want to determine (i) the thickness of the pancake, and (ii) some information on the structure near the contact line (Fig. 17). For our one-dimensional problem the shape is ruled by Eq. (2.49), with S &0. The maximum thickness corresponds to dg/dx =0, and this gives a condition

"

P(e) +G(e)=S .

But we have two unknowns: the thickness e and the pressure po. To obtain a second condition, for a finite droplet, we should calculate the total volume Q. Here, however, we shall restrict our attention to the limit of a very wide pancake (Q~ oo ). As usual, it is then convenient to think of Eq. (2.49) as the conservation of energy for a classical particle of position g at time x, with a mass y, a potential energy — (P +G), and a total energy —S. For strongly negative values of the total energy —S, the particle oscillates in a wall near /=0, and the period is finite (i.e. , the droplet size is finite). But if —S is adjusted to coincide with the maximum of the potential, then the particle takes an infinite time to reach this maximum (infinitely wide pancake). The maximum then defines the position at long times (the macroscopic thickness of the pancake). This gives a hydrostatic condition identical in form to Eq. (2.59),

H =— dP/de

A horizontal plate (at height H above reservoir level) is exposed to the vapor and completely covered by a wetting film. Here there does not exist a contact line giving us a balance of forces and specifying the integration constant in Eq. (2.49). But we obtain directly the equilibrium thickness e by minimization of van der Waals and gravitational energies:

This is a classical equation, discussed long ago by the et al. , Russian school (Deryagin, 1940; Dzyaloshinskii 1961), verified on Rollin filtns of He~ (Brewer, 1978), on normal fluids (Deryagin et al. , 1978), and somewhat less clearly verified in experiments with consolute mixtures near the free surface (see the review by Moldover and Schmidt, 1983). Basically, when H is macroscopic ( —1 cm) the thickness is small (e-300 A), and nonretarded Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

(the "dry" case)

II(e) =pg (H+e),

a. The "moist" case

11( e) =pg (e +H) .

Non. volatile liquids

(2.60}

where is always the disjoining pressure. Eliminating (H) between Eqs. (2.61) and (2.62), we obtain an explicit relation between the spreading coefficient S and the wetting film thickness:

P(e)+ell(e) ——,pge =S .

To discuss Eq. (2.63), let us restrict our attention to van der Waals forces, with the simple limiting forms (2.42} or

TM,

P(e)+e11(e) =(m + 1)P(e) .

P(e)-e

We start from S~O: here, the thickness e is large, and we must use the retarded form (m =3). This gives

S =4B/3e' —pge2/2 .

The wetting film thickness at S =0 is

e(S =0) =e*=(8B/3pg)'

[Page 15]

P. G. de Gennes: Wetting: statics and dynamics differing only by a numerical coefficient from the thickness at 9, =0 in complete equilibrium [Eq. (2.60)]. TypiIf we now turn to cally e" equals several micrometers. small, positive values of the spreading coefficient S, we see from Eq. (2.66) that a useful dimensionless parameter 1S

=S(e"} /B .

S-0.

B/(e') —10 ergs/cm, while Numerically erg/cm . Thus u is immediately very large. Consequently, the gravitational term in Eq. (2.67) becomes completely negligible, and we may write (2.65) in the form S =eII(e)+P(e) .

Equation (2.69) is the basic formula for dry spreading with finite S. It could be obtained more directly by ignoring the edge of the "pancake" and writing only the extensive part of the energy. If W is the pancake area, this is a sum of capillary and VW energies,

f =fo SM+W—P(e) .

values of S, the discussion should include both VW and double-layer forces, and becomes more complex.

c. Complete

'

' is a capillary length (not to (see Bouasse, 1924). Here a be confused with the Debye screening length ~o ') of order of magnitude 1 mm. We have

e=a

Equation

2KD

ln

dx

+ a —K x=0.

(a &e &X) .

two regimes. (i) The film regime, where the curvature term d g/dx is negligible, leaving an exact balance between VW and gravitational pressures:

x —1/3K

2/3a 2/3

[It has been realized recently (Joanny and de Gennes, 1984c) that the profile (2.77) does not hold up to arbitrarix. Returning to the full equation (2.76), one can show that the film is truncated at a certain such that g, (x )=e(S), where e(S) is the minimal thickness defined in Eq. (2.72}.] (ii) The macroscopic regime, where the VW forces are

ly large altitudes

=x,

negligible.

The crossover between (i) and (ii} is nontrivial; it was discussed long ago by Deryagin (1940), more recently by Renk, Wayner, and Homsy (1978), Adamson and Zebib (1980), and by Telo de Gama (unpublished), Legait and de Gennes (1984), and Evans and Marini (1985) in connection with experiments by Moldover and Gammon (1983) who were studying capillary rise between two plates. Moldover and Gammon had proposed that the effective interplate distance (to compute the capillary rise) be reduced by twice the thickness of a single film, 2$&(x~), taken at the level of the nominal contact line x =xi. Actually the presence of a second plate thickens the films, and the correction should be 3$&(xl) rather than 2g, (in the

SKD

(2.73) should

The standard (loose) discussion of Eq. (2.76) separates out

g (x)

2S

=gPP

How is this modified when we switch on the VW forces? For S =0 exactly, the picture is essentially unaltered. For S ~0, a film climbs up the wall. If x is now the altitude above the bulk liquid surface, and P(x) the film thickness, the equilibrium condition is (in the nonretarded regime)

Equation (2.72) provides the explanation for a very classical fact, observed long ago by Cooper and Nuttal (1915): liquids of large S spread more efficiently than liquids of small S. We do see in Eq. (2.72} that the final spreading film is thinner if S is larger, and this, in turn, implies that the equilibrium surface covered is larger. of the Most of us believed that the explanation Cooper-Nuttal rule could be based on a different, dynamic effect, namely, more rapid spreading of drops of large S, but this is not true. As we shaH see in Sec. IV, the rate of spreading of a droplet is essentially independent of S. Let us close this discussion with two remarks. The first concerns the edge of the "pancake" realized after spreading. Returning to the minimization near (=0, we can check that the edge is always parabolic, with the structure (2.55). The second remark concerns the case where the dominant long-range force is due to a double layer. Then, neglecting gravitational effects and inserting (2.43) into (2.69) one arrives at

e=

1/2

vertical wall

(2.74}

d ~

which brings one directly to Eq. (2.69). For most practical purposes (finite S), the value of e deduced from Eq. (2.69) is of order 100 A or less. The nonretarded form of VW interactions holds ( m =2). This gives the final formula (Joanny and de Gennes, 1984b)

wetting:

The macroscopic analysis for a wetting liquid (8, =0) near a Uertical wa11 predicts a certain curved profile, with a contact line W at a level h& above the bulk liquid surface,

This must be minimized with the constraint

eM =A=const,

hold for

S«Ctco'.

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

~I am indebted

At larger

ence.

to Professor R. Evans for the Deryagin refer-

[Page 16]

nonretarded regime). Similarly, for a single plate, the thickness of the film in the crossover region (x~-h, ) is expected to be

g-g((h))-I~

'

Finally let us consider the case of negligible van der Waals forces and dominant double-layer forces. Equilibrating gravitational pressures and double-layer pressures, we get a thickness

g(x) =

2KD

ln

pgX

and we find a film extending up to a finite height,

Pg Equation (2.79) is limited by the restrictions mentioned after Eq. (2.58): above x =x a residual film may be present, because of short-range disjoining pressures, but below x =x the logarithmic profile should be visible. +m

III. THE WETTING TRANSITION

A. Experiments

on related systems

1. Scope interface L/V, in the vicinity of a solid contact angle 8, (partial wetting} or a strictly vanishing contact angle (complete wetting). There may exist a particular temperature T„at which we switch from one regime to the other. This is called the wetting transition temperature. Unfortunately, the L/V/S systems are usually not convenient for studies of this wetting transition. To change significantly the interfacial energies y, j. , we would have to scan a rather broad temperature range. To maintain the L/V equilibrium then requires that one work at high Because of these practical difficulties, all pressures. current studies on T have been carried out with the other three-phase equilibria, where temperature variations (at atmospheric pressure) are feasible and have more spectacular effects on the interfacial energies. The two main exA/liquid B, free surface/liquid amples are solid/liquid A/liquid B, where A and B are two coexisting phases of a binary mixture with a certain critical consolute temperature T, . It turns out that, for such a case, the interfacial energies vary considerably when we consider the broad vicinity of T, (typically a 30' interval}. This makes the experimentation much simpler. Thus, in this section, we shall broaden our subject and consider a variety of three-phase equilibria. The main emphasis, however, will be on solid/fluid/fluid systems. It is reasonable to assume that all these systems are rather similar (as far as the static properties are concerned). Thus the liquid/vapor wetting transitions, when observed, will probably follow the laws described here.

A liquid/vapor

S, may exhibit either a finite equilibrium

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

2. Wetting films Numerous examples of complete wetting are found with solid/liquid/vapor systems. But the existence of ~etting films, with t9, =0, in other types of three-phase equilibria has been established only during the last decade. An important, early experiment was carried out by Heady and Cahn (1972). Here the solid S is replaced by a and V are two liquids, vapor phase. The analogs of made of a hydrocarbon (methyl cyclohexane) and of the fluorinated analog of this hydrocarbon. The fluorocarbon (hydrocarbon) system has a consolute point T, . Below the critical temperature T, we can have coexistence of two equilibrium phases; one of these is rich in fluorocarbon and will be called L; the other is rich in hydrocarbon and will be called V. The original aim of the Heady-Cahn experiment was to study a quench into the two-phase region, followed by nucleation of into V. They found, however, that, in the vicinity of the free surface, nucleation barriers could never be observed: droplets of L immediately began to drip from the surface. They concluded that, in the range of temperatures studied, a wetting film of L was always present near the surface S. Another early observation of wetting films came from metallurgy (Zabel et al. , 1981). The L/V system here is a single crystal of niobium containing a significant fraction of dissolved hydrogen. The analog of S is again the free surface. In a certain temperature range the Nb/H system shows a two-phase equilibrium (a —. =a'). Both phases are cubic, but they differ in their hydrogen content. The lattice spacing is swollen by the presence of H, and the nature of the phase present near the surface can thus be detected by x-ray reflections. The conclusion is that the a phase wets the interface, the thickness of the a film being of order one micron.

3. Wetting transitions

with

consolute pairs

A relatively simple measurement of 0, was carried out by Pohl and Goldburg (1982) on a system of two liquid phases (A, B) (lutidine water mixtures) against common glass (S). The technique is based on capillary rise (Fig. 4) and allows for a plot of cosO, as a function of tempera-

ture. Below a certain temperature T = T~, cosO, = 1, while above T = T„, cos8, decreases (with a nearly constant slope). Another important measurement was carried out by Moldover and Schmidt (1983) with S=free surface, mixtures. Macroscopic A, B = alcohol + fluorocarbon measurements of the contact angle indicated a wetting transition at T =311 K, and complete wetting (by the fluororich phase) in the interval between T and T, =363 K. Ellipsometric measurements of the thickness e of the fluorocarbon film show a finite jump of e(T) at T = T . This transition is c1early of first order. To summarize, for these S/A/B systems we find cornplete wetting in a finite temperature interval ( T, ) near the critical point, and partial wetting far from T, . There

T,

[Page 17]

P. G. de Gennes: Wetting: statics and dynamics are more complicated cases. In particular, the pair near the free surface 5, shows a cyclohexane-methanol, complex sequence of transitions, which occurs only in the (water, acetone). We presence of dilute contaminants shall come back to these impurity effects at the end of Sec. III.B. But the two examples (Pohl and Goldburg, 1982; Moldover and Schmidt, 1983) above are probably typical of a generic (impurity-free) situation. A final remark: wetting transitions are also observed with solid films evaporated on a solid surface (for instance, organic solids on graphite, or oxygen on graphite). But the situation here is more complex for many reasons. For crystalline, epitaxial films, the discrete nature of the solid layers introduces a wealth of new transitions, and the elastic distortion fields induced by the substrate complicate the energy balance. For a recent discussion of these "solid on solid" problems see Gittes and Schick

(1984).

specific form chosen for the free energy y& is a classical "gradient square" functional, Gfp yz — dz , L— dz

W(p) =F(p)

P— . , pp—

d p

We follow first the simple and illuminating arguments of Cahn (1977) phrased in language adequate for a system. solid/liquid/vapor the is to describe simplification (a) The first liquid/solid interface by a continuum theory, where the liquid number density p(z) varies smoothly as a function of the distance z from the solid surface (see Fig. 21 below). This will be most adequate if we are dealing with temperatures T that are not too far from the critical point T, . The hope is that most variations of p(z) will take place over distances comparable to the correlation length g, and this g' is larger than the intermolecular distance (a) . in the liquid, when (b) A second, important assumption is that the forces between solid and liquid are of short range ( -a), and can, in fact, be described simply by adding a special energy y, (p, ) at the solid surface. Here p, =p(z =0}is the liquid density "at the surface" and y, is a certain functional,

T-T,

y lps + 2 y2p& +

The y term (favoring large p, ) describes an attraction of the liquid by the solid. The y2 term represents a certain attractive interactions near reduction of the liquid/liquid the surface: a liquid molecule lying directly on the solid does not benefit from the same high number of liquid neighbors that it would have in the bulk. The parameters yl and y2 describe the essential features at the interface. However, the Cahn approach is slightly more general than Eq. (3. 1): any form of y, (p, ) is acceptable. We may say that y, is the contribution to the solid/fluid interfacial energy which comes from direct contact. This is not all the interfacial energy. Another contribution y~ will come from the distortions in the profile p(z). (c) A final (less important} approximation amounts to treating the fluid statistics by a mean-field theory. The

of the surface density

To construct the density optimize (3.2) and obtain dz

yO

+ W(p)

Here F is the free-energy density of the bulk liquid, p its chemical potential, P its pressure. [For a complete justification of Eqs. (3.2) and (3.3} see Rowlinson and Widom, 1982.] We shall assume that p and P correspond to the exact coexistence of liquid and vapor. Then W(p) has two minima of equal height ( W=O) for the two equilibrium densities p=pi (liquid) and p=p„(vapor). The general aspect of 8'(p) is shown in Fig. 19. For simplicity we take L independent of p.

1. The Cahn model

yc

2. Determination

B. Theory

profile in the liquid p(z) we

dW(p) ~p

from which we construct a first integral '2

L Jp

dz

=8'(p) .

There is no integration constant in Eq. (3.5). If we consider a point far in the buick, where p=pq (p~ being either p~ or p„), we must have dp/dz=O and W(pb)=0 as explained in Fig. 19. The simple form of Eq. (3.5) allows for a direct calculation of the distortion energy y~ [Eq.

(3.2)], ya(p, ps)=

L.

dp=

f [2LW(p)]' "dp .

The last step is to determine

the surface density p, by minimization of the total energy y„, = y~+ y, (p, ). The resulting condition is

—y,'(p, ) = [2L W(p, )]' [where

y,'(p) =dy, /dp]. This leads to the graphical con-

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July 1985

w(p)

FIG. 19. The "effective free energy" 8 (p) as a function of the density p.

[Page 18]

(a) Tc

P„P' (p

pL p11

ps

)

(b) T=T pf

P /)

P„P'

FIG. 20. The Cahn construction determining the density at the surface p, . In the example displayed we have two locally stable roots (p', p"). The other two roots are unstable.

(c) T

struction of Fig. 20. Here, for simplicity, we have chosen the specific form of y, (p, ) proposed in Eq. (3. 1), and this gives a linear plot for — y,'(p, ) =y& —y2p, .

3. Two types of wetting transitions a. First-order transitions

we are comparing 2 situations here: 1. a dry surface surrounded by vapor, or 2. a wet surface surrounded by a liquid phase (this may be thin or thick), surrounded by vapour in the first case, the interfacial energy is gamma_sv, in the second is gamma_sl+gamma spreading occurs when the second energy is lower then the first, or S>0

If the slope (y2) is small, the condition (3.7) may give four roots for p, . Two of these are locally stable, while the others correspond to a maximum of the free energy and are unstable. In this regime we find a competition between a state of low p, (p, =p') describing a nearly "dry" solid in contact with the vapor (pb — p„) and a state of high p, (p, =p" &pt) describing a wet solid in contact with the liquid (pb — pt). The energies of these two states are (per cm of solid surface)

y„=yd(p„p')+y, (p'), 1 I

Vd(PI P )

P„

P"

(d)

P„

ps

FIG. 21. First-order transition from the Cahn construction.

(a)

At low T, two surface states p' (solid/vapor) and p" (solid/liquid) can exist. The spreading coefficient S=SI — S2 is negative (partial wetting). (b) At T = S~ — S2 and the spreading coefficient vanishes. The contact angle is 0, =0. (c) At S~ S2 and S is positive. But the low-density solution (p ) is not observable in equilibrium. A wetting film is always lower in energy. (d) At higher T the root p' disappears completely: in this last regime it is not possible to define a spreading coefficient S.

T,

T) T,

)

+ )' (P

We must also remember that the liquid/vapor interfacial energy y can be derived from the same analysis:

)'=rd(p. Pt) . Let us discuss the "spreading

coefficient" defined in

Sec. II:

Using Eqs. (3.6), (3.8), and (3.9), one can check that S has a simple graphical interpretation in Fig. 20: S =S] — Sp is the difference of the two shaded areas. Let us now vary the temperature, as indicated in Fig.

)

Ps

(i) At T the difference pt — p, is large, and S2 is larger than S~. This gives S~O, i.e., cosO, is finite (partial wetting). (ii) If we raise T, the difference S~ — S2 decreases and

«T,

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

vanishes at a special temperature

0, =0.

T = T . Here S=O and

T,

(iii) At temperatures T ~ S2 &S&, and S is positive. As we know from Sec. I, this regime is unobservable in thermal Instead equilibrium. of building up liquid/vapor interface with p, =p', the system prefers to achieve it in two steps, through a macroscopic film of L wetting the surface and giving a total surface energy y, t+y. Thus, here, we keep 8, =0 (complete wetting). Ultimately, at high temperatures ( T, ), only one stable root is left, corresponding to a solid/liquid interface. In this scenario the transition at T involves a jump from one energy minimum (p, =p') to a distinct minimum (p, =p") and is clearly of first order The of cosO, versus temperature in the partial wetting regime has a finite slope, and intersects cosO, = 1 at T = T .

T-

plot.

[Page 19]

b. Second-order transitions

((

If the slope (yz) of —y,'(p, } is large, at all temperatures

T we find only one root p, from the construction illustrated in Fig. 22. (i) At low temperatures p, &pt, and we can construct two density profiles corresponding to two physical situations: one profile where p(z) decreases from p, to p„ (describing S/V) and one profile where p(z) increases from p, to pt (describing S/L). Again a discussion of areas allows one to compare the surface energies. One finds a negative spreading coefficient, S & 0 corresponding to partial wetting. (ii) At high temperatures ( T & T ), the surface density p, is higher than pI, there is only one profile associated with p„where p(z) decreases from p, to PI (S/L interface). The S/V interface must then involve a macroscopic film of L, and we have complete wetting. Clearly this scenario corresponds to a continuous ("second-order") transition.

At T = T~, p, =pI exactly.

FIG. 23. Density profile for a thick film (thickness g larger than the interface width g). Depending

on the coefficients in

Eq. (3.1), the value at the surface (p, ) may be either larger or smaller than the bulk value in the liquid (pL).

thickness g near the nominal interface (around z =g). Far from this interface (z «g) the difference between p(z) and pt is exponentially small. At the surface

p(z =0) =p, =pI —p,

4. Special features of second-order

E=(pt

transitions

Second-order wetting transitions are probably rather rare, for reasons to be explained below. But they have stimulated a considerable theoretical effort and deserve a few comments. Let us consider a liquid film, of thickness g, covering the solid, and described by the density profile p(z) shown in Fig. 23: most of the density drop takes place in a =&' (p)

(a) Tc [~ LW p &]

I/2

&.

(3.1 1)

—(0C) . p}exp—

[Equation (3.11) can be derived from a complete integration of (3.5), taking for W(p) the simplest polynomial form compatible with Fig. 19.] Near T~ (for T slightly lower than T ) c, is small and positive, and the energy of the S/V interface may be expanded in powers of E,

)e+ ' y2E + . y„=y,„(E=O} a(T—

Here a(T) can be computed explicitly from Eq. (3.7) and is proportional to T — T (a&0 for T & T). Equation (3.12} can be translated into a plot of film energy versus film thickness, since e and g are related by (3. 11):

p„)exp( — g/g) y, „=y, „(T = T„)—a(pI —

+ —,y~(pt —p, )'exp( —2g/g)+. . .

For T & T we have a weak attractive tail at large g and a finite repulsive tail at smaller g (Fig. 24). There is an optimal film thickness which corresponds to 8 =a/y2 or Ysv

Tw

Ysv (T )

p, p,X

FIG. 22. Second-order transitions from the Cahn construction. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

FIG. 24. Energy vs thickness for a film, in the vicinity of a second-order transition (at T= T ). This type of plot (with exponential decay at large distance) would occur in the absence of long-range forces.

[Page 20]

g=g" =gin

Ysv

This approach gives a very pictorial description of the second-order wetting transition (in a mean-field picture): there is a wetting film even for T & but its thickness diverges logarithmically at T = T . For T & T„ the energy (3. 13) becomes repulsive at all distances, and the film is macroscopic. As usual, this mean-field picture is complicated by fluctuation effects Th.e L /V interface may undulate

T,

g(xy) =

Two

+T + Two

P+ u (xy) .

To order u the fluctuation energy is

T= Tw

f = J dx dy y„, (g")+ y,",(P)u

T~Tw

where y "(P) can be derived from Eq. (3. 13) and turns out to be proportional to a . The form (3. 15) leads to a correlation length g„ for the fluctuations: '

y" (g" )

1/2

-( T~ —T)

However, the expansion (3. 15) of the energy to order u If one computes from Eqs. (3.15) and (3. 16) a mean-square average (u ), one finds u Thus the special events where the fluctuating L/V interface touches the solid surface must be taken into consideration. This has been carried out in detail (Brezin, Halperin, and Leibler, 1983a, 1983b) and gives rise to a very unusual critical exponent, whose value depends continuously on the parameter kT /g y. We shall not describe these delicate fluctuation effects in any detail, because they may often be short-circuited by long-range forces, as explained below. is inadequate.

-g'.

5. Role of long-range forces a. Simple estimates of wetting film energies

Let us assume that the short-range forces [described by y (p, )] lead by themselves to a second-order transition T p associated with the film energy (3. 13). Then let us switch on an agonist van der Waals interaction, unretarded [Eq. (2.45)], with a positive Hamaker constant A. Then the plot of film energy versus thickness is still monotonous and repulsive for T ~ T p, and we have complete wetting in this temperature region. But for T & T p the plot is deeply modified (Fig. 25). At large thicknesses g, the VW term dominates over the exponentials, and the energy is repulsive. At shorter distances the attractive exponential — a exp( —g/g) may create a trough when a is large enough. Finally, when a reaches a certain value al Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

FIG. 25. Energy vs thickness with incorporation of long-range van der Waals forces. These forces are assumed to be "agonist" (i.e. , they tend to thicken the film). They dominate at long distances.

(temperature Ti ), the trough may give an energy equal to that of a macroscopic film y„((=ao). At this point there is a certain optimal thickness gi, and the system jumps by a first-order transition from g= ~ to g=g, . A similar description can be given for water solutions against an ionizable surface. Whenever the Debye screening length ~D is larger than the L. /V interface thickness g, the Langmuir repulsive term [obtained from Eq. (2.57)] dominates the behavior of the film energy at large distances, and the energy plot is qualitatively similar to the preceding one. The transition point is shifted from T~p to a lower value T~, and the transition becomes first order. Finally let us mention briefly some other situations. (i) An "antagonist" VW force, corresponding to a negative Hamaker constant A. Here the long-range energy tends to shrink the wetting film, and the L/V interface is thus stuck near the solid wall (partial wetting). A transition can, however, occur (at T & T~p) between two different minima, corresponding, respectively, to a thick film and a thin film. (ii) When the density of the V phase varies significantly with temperature, it may happen that we switch from the agonist to the antagonist case at one particular temperature T=Tz (Lipowsky and Kroll, 1984; Dietrich and Schick, 1984). If, in the absence of long-range forces, there were a second-order wetting transition at T = T p, then, upon switching on VW forces, one would still expect a second-order transition, shifted to T=Ts (provided tha't Ts T p). This prediction can be understood by means of diagrams similar to Fig. 25. Using naive VW calculations, one expects the Hamaker

)

This was pointed out to me by M. Schick.

[Page 21]

P. G. de Gennes: Wetting: statics and dynamics constant ties a;,

A to be a quadratic

function of the polarizabili-

—(as —aL )(ar —a v),

and the switching temperature

Tz corresponds to

aL(T~)=as . Thus there will exist a second-order wetting transition at T =Tz provided that a number of conditions are satisfied: (1) The "bare" transition T 0 is of second order. (2) There exists a Ts. the polarizability of the dense liquid must be higher than a~, while the liquid polarizability at the critical point must be smaller than az. (3) Ts is above T 0. (4) Although the preceding discussion involved only the leading term in the long-range potentials [ V(g}-g ], we must make sure that at the temperature Tz, where this leading term vanishes, the next term } does not upset the order of the transition. This has been analyzed (Dietrich and Schick, 1984; Ebner, Saam, and Sen, 1984; Kroll and Meister, 1984), and imposes another condition. From an experimental point of view, the conditions But there (1)— (4) are not easy to satisfy simultaneously. remains some hope of finding a second-order transition by an intelligent tuning of parameters.

the absence of long-range forces, Vf(g) is an essential component of the theory for second-order transitions. But in the presence of long-range forces, which decay much more slowly with distance than Vf(g), fluctuation effects become negligible. Thus, even if one finds a second-order transition at some T = Tq, as explained above, this transition is expected to be of the mean-field type. (3) It is incorrect to assume exponential tails for the L/V interface [Eq. (3.11)] when the interactions between molecules in the fluid become long range. The (Vp) expansion of Eq. (3.2) then becomes invalid. This was noticed long ago by Christiansen (see Plesner and Platz, 1968) and more recently by de Gennes (1981) and Rowlinson, Barker, and Henderson (1981). What happens when the (Vp) expansion breaks down? A first attempt to answer this question is due to Sullivan (1979,1981). He chose a pair interaction,

(-g

b. Limitations and improvements

The discussion on the effects of long-range forces based on Fig. 25 has the merit of being simple, and has been used by a number of authors (Pandit er al. , 1982; Hauge and Schick, 1983; Tarazona and Evans, 1983; Tarazona, Telo da Gama, and Evans, 1983; de Gennes, 1983; Teletzke et al. , 1983; Privman, 1984). The discussion, however, has certain limitations which should be kept in mind. (See the review by Sullivan and Telo da Gama,

1985.) (1) It holds only when the L/V interface thickness g is not too large, so that the film has a well defined thickness (g»g). Thus the close vicinity of the L/V critical point would require a special study. (2) Fluctuations of the L/V interface could modify the effective film energy in a profound way. This possibility was mentioned in particular by Pandit et al. (1982), and was studied in detail by Nightingale et al. (1983), using a "solid on solid" model, but in a temperature regime (above roughening) that made it adequate for the L/V interface. They did not find any dramatic effects of the the We can understand this as follows: fluctuations. fluctuating interface is restricted in its motions by the presence of the solid wall. This entropy reduction creates stands for fluctuaan effective potential Vf(g) (where tion), and Vf(g) is a rapidly decreasing function of g. In

(3.17} and a solid/molecule

V(z;)= —e e

interaction

with

the same range

Sullivan showed that this special choice allows for a simple solution of the complete (integral) mean-field equations for p(z), without assuming a (Vp) expansion. He conclusions. reached some interesting physicochemical High e~ led to plots where 0, (T) was decreasing (as it is in the Cahn theory), while low e led to (9, increasing with T. His wetting transitions were of second order, but later work of Teletzke et al. (1983) and Benner et al. (1984), with the same model, ultimately led to first-order transitions. (The more complex situation with different y parameters in U and V was studied by Hauge and Schick, 1983.) In any case, the exponential interactions (3.17) and (3.18) are not adequate to study the order of the transition. They lead to a film energy p(z) which is also exponential, and thus more abruptly decreasing than the ). expected VW term It is more instructive to keep realistic VW interactions; this was done in numerical calculations by Tarazona and Evans (1983). Using the standard 6-12 potential, they found wetting transitions that were constantly of first order. This, in our view, does not mean that second-order transitions are entirely ruled out. But the conditions for a second-order transition in the presence . of long-range forces, as deduced from the analysis of Dietrich and Schick (1984), are so stringent that they were not met in any of the cases considered in recent numerical calcula&

(-g

tions. Tarazona et al. (1983) also extended these calculations and considered the equilibrium thickness of wetting films. Their results agree with the macroscopic predictions of

Fig. 25. 7I am indebted to M. Schick for this presentation. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

An interesting extension of these ideas has been worked out very recently by Evans and Tarazona (1984}. Instead of a single plate, exposed to a liquid or a gas, they consid-

[Page 22]

er two parallel plates, separated by a gap of width Hg. Using the Sullivan trick, they compute the effective interfacial energies 2ysL (T, Hg ) and 2ys~( T, Hs ) as a function of H~. For a given Hg there may exist a transition temperature T, (Hs) such that, at this temperature, —— yzz. For large Hg this T, coincides with the wety&L ting transition point T . For small Hg, they find that the transition line T, (Hg) ends up at a critical point (this, however, occurs when Hg is comparable to the range of the forces, and may thus be rather sensitive to detailed local effects).

c. Prewetting transitions Our discussion in this section was restricted to cases of macroscopic coexistence between liquid and vapor. If we impose a vapor pressure p„below the value p, ~(T} for equilibrium, we cannot maintain a macroliquid/vapor scopic L phase, but we may still have a film of L near the solid. The equilibrium thickness of these films can be analyzed in terms of a graph very similar to Fig. 24: we need only add a term linear in g (with a slope proportional to the difference in chemical potential between vapor and liquid). In many cases one still finds competition between two minima, and a possible first-order transition between them describing a switch from a thick film to a thin film. For more details on this "prewetting transition" the reader is referred to Ebner and Saam (1977), Tarazona and Evans (1983), and Nakanishi and Fisher (1982).

(iii) At lower temperatures T &T,tt only a very thin residual film remains and methanol partially wets the free

surface. A very remarkable feature of these experiments is that, in the absence of water, the two transitions disappear: there is no detectable wetting film (at the free surface) at any T & T, for the pure system. b. Tentative interpretations On. e line of thought, advocated (i) Surface transitions by Leibler (1984},is based on a possible similarity between surface transitions and the effect of He3 impurities in superfluid He4. Near a solid surface He3 is depleted (less attracted than He4) and superfluidity is favored. The result is the existence, in a small temperature range, of a twodimensional superfluid phase near the solid, while the bulk He4+ He3 system is still normal. Similar surface transitions induced by water impurities could occur in the cyclohexane/methanol system, and be responsible for anomalous behavior in a small region near T, o. But it is not easy to interpret in these terms the lack of any observable film in region (i). (ii) Macroscopic balance of interfacial tensions The. idea here is to describe the competition of water and methanol for the free surface, making use only of the macroscopic surface tensions y,& between the various partners (S, a, P, and &=water). Let us assume the following structure for the y;j:

of T,

y, -independent 6. Impurity effects: facts and conjectures

ysa = ysl — ys ysp

a. Facts We have already mentioned in Sec. III.A that chemical contaminants may have dramatic effects on the wetting behavior of a liquid/liquid system. This was recognized from direct observations of contact angles (Moldover and Cahn, 1980) and substantiated by various measurements on the cyclohexane/methanol system near the free surface S. The contaminant was either water (Beaglehole, 1983; Tverkrem and Jacobs, 1983) or acetone (Cohn and Jacobs, 1983) but in the latter case water may also have been The Beaglehole experipresent as a second contaminant. ments on water effects were based on ellipsometry. They are summarized below in terms of three different regimes, for a sample with 0.3% water. (i) Very close to the critical point ( T,„& T & T, ) no significant wetting film is observed. (ii) In a certain temperature range (T,ff & T & T,„) a wetting film of the P phase (methanol rich, heavy) is observed. The unfavorable gravitational potential of the P phase is compensated by the attractive force between S and methanol. Beaglehole also mentions fluctuations of the thickness (near T,„} plus a long time drift of the thickness (in most of the temperature interval).

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

ysl+m t s

Here y, l is the surface tension of the critical mixture. Following Cahn (1977) it is assumed that y, — y, tt is proportional to the difference in concentration between u and P, the latter being itself proportional to m =(b, T/T, )'~ . ' The coefficient y, is postulated to be positiue This mean. s that, in the absence of water, the free surface prefers the a phase. Since this is also the lighter phase, it will occupy a macroscopic region below the free surface, and no wetting film is expected (in agreement with the observations on water-free systems}. Let us now list the other interfacial tensions:

kT

—y — 2 y p=

y)m

(where we have used a classical scaling ansatz and the ap' for the standard critical exproximation l3= —, v= —, ponents)

',

ywa=ywl+ymm

yap

yml

ym~

We expect y' to be strongly positive (the water/methanol interfacial tension smaller than much the being water/hydrocarbon tension).

[Page 23]

Having defined the surface tensions, we may now construct the spreading coefficients S, defined as in Sec. II. Here we shall call S;JI, the spreading coefficient for a film

of (j) being spread between phase (i) and phase ( k),

S /k =. r k — (r J+-}'/I } .

As we know from Sec. II, a positive S means spontaneous spreading and buildup of a wetting film. The first spreading coefficient of interest is

. . '+ .

.

'+} ' } 1— r—i+ m (}, S, p( T) =1'.i ', =S, p(T, )+m(y,

y' ) .

Let us assume that S,~p(T, ) &0, so that, at the critical point, water does not wet the SI3 interface. However, when we decrease T (increase m), because the coefficient (y,'+y' } is expected to be strongly positive, we may rapidly reach a temperature T,„such that

S,~p(T, „)=0 .

(3.24}

Below this temperature we do have a water film, and we must now consider the possible spreading of the P phase between water and a. Making use of the definition (3.22} and of the listed y, j values, we arrive at

(3.2S) and when m increases ( T decreases} we may switch from positive S p (wetting film of P) to negative S p . Thus we expect a second transition at T ff, where

=T,

S ~(T,ff)=0.

At this point, the system becomes unable to sustain a sequence gas~water~P a. It may then achieve one of the following conformations:

o.

if S,

gas~o. if S,

&0.

gas water

The formula changing

S,

for S,~

&0,

is obtained

—m, =S, p(T, ) —m(y,'+y' ) .

from (3.23) by inter-

m and

With our assumption, all terms in (3.27) are negative. We thus expect the water film to redissolve when we cool down below T,ff, and the cz phase to be in direct contact with the surface, leaving only a very thin layer (g) of excess cyclohexane. This scenario thus appears compatible with the data. Clearly this model is tentative and very rough. The water film may be much too thin to justify these purely macroscopic arguments, and it may be that there is no sharp W/a interface (if water is entirely soluble in a). But the trend is interesting. The slow drift, and the fluctuations, seen in the interval T,ff & To„, could be due to the slow buildup of water content at the surface by diffusion and random convection.

(T

8I am indebted to G. Teletzke for this remark. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July 1985

It may be worthwhile to mention at this point another strange system, studied by Ross and Kornbrekke (1984). This is cyclohexane/anilin against glass. Here, at low temperatures, cosO is an increasing function of T, and reaches unity at a special temperature Tl. But above T&, It may be that this reflects a cosO decreases smoothly. very fundamental multicritical behavior. But it may also be an impurity effect. When we reach T =T&, an anilin film spreads over the capillary wall and may trap an impurity (water' ?) from distant sources. Then, at T & T~, we would be dealing with a different surface (glass wet by impurity). Clearly, all the binary mixtures under discussion (hydrocarbon/polar liquid} have chemical difficulties, such as trapping of water or spontaneous decomposition, and these difficulties are enhanced when the surface S is glass, which is also amenable to ion exchange, etc. Full control of impurity effects will require long, patient experiments. (iii) Effects of long range -forces The ab. ove interpretation assumed that long-range forces do not play a major role in the existence of the films, although they clearly control the thickness of a film. An opposite viewpoint has been taken by Law (1984). Further, using a certain (assumed) form for the VW energies of films when the thickness (g) is not very large compared to the width of the a/P interface, he attempts to discuss the near vicinity of the bulk critical point (domain of large g). He finds three roots for the equilibrium film thickness, and claims that, in a certain range, all three roots are locally stable. The competition between three states then gives interesting possibilities, but it is hard to see how an energy function could have three distinct minima without having two intermediate maxima, also showing up as roots; thus this calculation is open to some doubt. Another line of thought has been suggested by Israelashvili (1984). He pointed out that in certain layer sysVW tems (with dipoles present) the retarded/nonretarded energies may be of opposite signs (in a certain temperature range). This could lead to new energy minima, or maxima, in Fig. 6, and lead to our phase transitions. IV. TME DYNAMICS OF SPREADING

A. Macroscopic measurements

Many practical problems involve a liquid spreading on a solid and displacing a gas. However, long, patient efforts have been required to obtain quantitative data on these problems. First, one must eliminate hysteresis effects. As we have seen in Sec. II, this is not a dream. With a reasonably (but not perfectly) smooth and homogeneous surface, no hysteresis should be left. Second, one should choose a simple flow geometry liminating, for instance, gravitational effects (which are often important in practice, but not very fundamental}. A loose, but useful, condition for getting rid of gravitation is that the

[Page 24]

linear dimensions of the drop (or of the meniscus) studied to the capillary length be small when compared '=(pg/y)'/ . Similarly, with common viscous fluids, one wishes to eliminate all inertial effects. We shall restrict our attention to slow, viscous flows, except in one section, which will be devoted to the opposite case of superfluid helium 4, where inertia is dominant. A general review on the significance of the experiments has been given by Dussan (1979). Two arrangements, which satisfy the above requirements, have been used in detailed experiments: forced flow in a capillary and spontaneous spreading of a drop on a horizontal solid. The choice of materials has not been very systematic. The liquids, in particular, are often selected because they have a viscosity that falls in a convenient range, one typical example being silicone oils. In fact, these oils are polymer melts, which may have very anomalous flow fields in the vicinity of the solid; fortunately, however, as we shall see in the theoretical sections, there are reasons to believe that the macroscopic laws are weakly (logarithmically) sensitive to these special properties. Thus the experiments described below are probably meaningful, even when they make use of these oils. Most experiments have been performed with fluids that wet the solid completely, but there remains a fundamental ambiguity, because this may correspond either to S=O or to S~ 0. The case S=O is expected to be exceptional for dry solids, but possible for moist solids (8, =0). However, we know, from the static discussion of Sec. II, that in the moist case the thickness of the preexisting liquid film is not fixed, but depends on a control parameter. In cornplete L/V equilibrium, this is the height of the plate above the reservoir providing the equilibrium. At present, we do not seem to have any data from experiments on spreading, in the moist case, with prescribed Most existing experivalues of this control parameter. ments refer to the dry case, and probably correspond to S&0. But clearly the role of initial conditions should be considered more precisely in future work.

(capillary number)

(where g is the fluid viscosity) ranged between 10 and 10. Hoffman measured an apparent contact angle 0, by a photographic technique. In a first series of experiments with silicone oils, he obtained conditions of complete wetting (S 0) and found a rather universal relation between 0, and w (Fig. 27):

)

=F(8, ) .

interest is the low velocity limit (m~0), where the Hoffman data can be represented in the form

Of particular

w =const&0,

with m =3+0.5. Thus 8, (m) first increases like w'/, and ultimately saturates at w=1, O, ~m. . In a second series of experiments, Hoffman worked with other oils and industrial products, giving partial wetting (8, &0). He then found that his data could still be expressed in terms of the same F function, by writing

=F(8, ) F(8, ) . —

However, the result (4.4) is much less documented than the data for complete wetting, and is open to some doubt. These experiments clearly suffer from some defects. The materials were chosen mainly for their industrial interest, and many of them could carry contaminants. Ten years later, we are still lacking systematic data on pure (nonpolymeric) liquids, as well as on polymers of controlled molecular weight. It would be also be of interest to find out whether the apparent contact angle, as measured in photographs, at a given U, is independent of the capillary diameter. [Recent studies by Dussan and Ngan (1982) indicate that there is in fact some dependence. ]

Forced flow in a capillary

The geometry chosen by Hoffman (1975) is shown in Fig. 26. He used a glass capillary (with a diameter -2 mm), inside which a fluid was forced with velocities varying over five decades. The dimensionless parameter

/

/

= U

reduced velocity w = Ug/y and apparent contact angle 8, (silicone oils on glass), after Hoffman w' (1975). At low w the relation is close to

FIG. 27. Relation between FICs. 26. Principle of the Hoffman experiments. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vof. 57, No. 3, Part I, Jufy 1985

[Page 25]

However, in spite of these limitations, it is clear that the Hoffman experiments represent an important advance. The universal law (4.2) is very important. In particular, it is amazing to see that it holds without alteration for liquids of different S (S &0): the magnitude of the spreading parameter has no influence. We shall explain this in detail later.

2. Spreading of a droplet

8, (t}. In the regimes where gravitation is negligible, the macroscopic shape of the droplet is found to be rather close to a spherical cap. Then the apparent contact angle, the drop thickness h (t), and the radius R (t) are related by

= 'R6, ,

—hR

«1),

this being the most imvalid for thin droplets (9, is the portant regime for complete spreading. Here droplet volume and is assumed to be constant (weak

evaporation). Experimentally it is found that R (t) increases rapidly at the early stages, and then very slowly. The data can often be represented (in terms of the wetted area mR ) by a power law: n. R'(t)

=t "Qt' .

The values of n obtained by different groups on different systems have been compared in a review by Marmur (1983). For water on glass, the early data of Hyppia (1948} suggest n=0. 22, but Lelah and Marmur (1981) have found a strong temperature effect, with n ranging from 0. 16 at 29'C to 0.32 at 15'C. One of the most accurate studies was performed by Tanner (1979) on silicone oils, and gave n=0. 21. The exponent p has not been studied with the same detail, but is of order ',—in the experiments of Lelah and Marmur (1981). Some general remarks on the exponents n and p are in order at this point. Let us assume that the relation beGAS

SOL. R (0 )

FIG. 28. A nearly flat droplet spreading on a solid: the macroscopic picture. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

tween apparent contact angle and velocity is correctly described by Eq. (4.3) and that the relevant velocity is the velocity of the contact line,

dR dt

+ema = pa 8ma

If we make use of the spherical cap approximation (4.5) and (4.6)] to eliminate O„we arrive at dR dt

Here most experiments have been performed for complete wetting (S&0). The principle is shown in Fig. 28. In the classical approach, the expanding radius R(t) is In other studies, the nearly measured from photographs. flat droplet is used as a lens. From the focal length of this lens one can go back to the apparent contact angle

[Eqs.

and the spreading

R 3m+1

law becomes

yst~m

Thus we expect 3m +1

2m

3m +1

Taking the most probable value m=3 from the Hoffman data, we are then led to n=0. 20 and p=0. 60. We shall see below that m=3 is indeed expected theoretically for all cases of dry spreading (S & 0).

B. The precursor

film

In the course of his pioneering work on wettability, Hardy (1919) recognized that a spreading droplet is announced by a precursor film (of submicrometer thickness), which shows up ahead of the nominal contact line. In particular, for droplets spreading on a solid surface, the film was revealed through its lubricating effects: a small test particle can slip more easily on the solid when the precursor is present. Hardy believed that these films occurred only with volatile liquids, which could condense ahead of the advancing droplet. This process may well exist, but more recent examples suggest that the film is present even in the absence of any vapor fraction (Bangham and Saweris, 1938; Chang et ai. , 1982). Detailed optical studies were carried out on the film at the Naval Research Laboratory (Bascom et al. , 1964), using nonpolar liquids which give complete spreading on steel. They found a precursor film, visible in ellipsometry at the late stages of spreading, with thicknesses of a few hundred angstroms. They also found (with impure liquids) a thicker, secondary film, probably due to Marangoni effects a volatile contaminant being eliminated near the front and creating gradients of y. We return to this impurity effect in Sec. IVF2, but omit it from the present discussion. In one case, with a molten, viscous glass (which can be quenched and examined later), the film obtained by spreading on a metal was seen by electron microscopy (Radigan et ai. , 1974). But the most brilliant detection of the film was based on electrical resistance measurements (Crhiradella et al. , 1975). The setup is slightly more complex [Fig. 29(a)], with a vertical plate and a conducting

[Page 26]

. -E,

Fll M -2(o

OHM-

METER

+

+

HCI

—E2--

(o)

FIG. 30. A nearly flat droplet spreading on a solid: the microscopic picture.

C. Interpretation Re

DRY

F ILM

BUl K

1. Three types of dissipation Let us restrict our attention to dry spreading (S &0) of a pure, nonpolar liquid, attracted towards the solid by 1ong-range van der Waals forces. Then the structure of the advancing front (with velocity U) corresponds to Fig.

FIG. 29. Electrical detection of the precursor film (Ghiradella et al. , 197S). (a) Principle: the resistance R, (t) between two electrodes E~E2 is measured. (b) Typical record of R, (t): as soon as the film reaches (El), R, (t) drops.

All macroscopic observations show the existence of a certain apparent contact angle 0, . At distances x —100 pm from the nominal contact line the fluid profile is very close to a simple wedge advancing along the solid. The motion of the liquid in this region has been probed in a clever experiment by Dussan and Davis (1974), marking the upper surface of the wedge with small spots of a dye (Fig. 31), and watching their motion (the liquid being highly viscous and the motion slow). They found a very characteristic rolling motion, reminiscent of a caterpillar

liquid HC1 that is set in vertical motion (velocity U). One measures the conductance between the bulk of the liquid (Ez) and an electrode (E& ) attached to the solid, when the nominal contact line W has not yet reached the electrode E~. One finds a finite conductance occurring well in advance (e.g. , when E& is one millimeter ahead of W). A typical decrease of resistance with time is shown in Fig. 29(b). In principle, this could be translated into a profile

Dl

2U

(x). In practice, however, all the experiments we have described suffer from serious limitations: impurity effects resulting in gradients of the surface tension y; choice of liquids, the polymer systems being in fact quite special, as explained in Secs. IV.B and IV.D; use of transient regimes (in the electrical experiments, where the velocity is imposed suddenly); noise and instability effects. For a11 these reasons, we do not yet have a quantitative experimental law for the simplest (steady-state) film profile. But the situation should improve soon. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July 1985

FIG. 31. (a) The Dussan-Davis

experiment: spots of a dye D~D. D3 are laid on the free surface of an advancing wedge. The spots slide down the wedge, and then get stuck to the solid. (b) The motion of a caterpillar vehicle is somewhat similar to the motion in the wedge [compare the velocity profiles v(z)].

[Page 27]

vehicle. This rolling motion gives rise to viscous friction. We shall call the corresponding dissipation (per unit length of the contact line W) TX, where the index w stands for "wedge. Ahead of the wedge we have a precursor film (of typical thickness 100 A} extending over a finite distance d. It has recently been realized (Hervet and de Gennes, 1984) that the viscous dissipation in this film is very strong. We shall call it TXy. The precursor film ends up by a real contact line W, (shifted by a distance d from the nominal contact line W). In the close vicinity of W„we may have special losses, due to the attachment of liquid molecules to the solid. Some of the available free energy S may be transformed directly into heat. This0 third contribution is largely unknown; we shall call it TXt (where 1 stands for

"

"local").

YsL

cos

= S+ y8, (8, «1) .

then write

3U — u(z)= 22 z +2(z) . (

The viscous dissipation integrated over the film depth is

f dzn

3gU2

du dz

(where g is the fluid viscosity), and the total dissipation the wedge is

"~» 3gU Hlill

3&U

8g

x,

max

X g)'g

in

We expect „ to be a cutoff related to the macroscopic size of the droplet x The cutoff is more difficult to specify and will be discussed below. But without the dissipation would diverge; as exany cutoff plained in Hellenic terms by Huh and Scriven (1971), "not even Herakles could sink a solid!" Various physical processes may remove the singularity, and the choice of process depends very much on the choice of systems.

„-R.

x;„

(x;„~0}

We can relate the total dissipation to the unbalanced by macroscopic considerations similar to Fig. 2: Young force F, obtained

iso

Then the total dissipation is

FU = T(X~+ Xy+X )t.

The common trend of the literature has been (i) to ignore XI. we shall see that this may0 be correct in some favorable cases, and (ii) to ignore X~. we shall see that this is grossly incorrect, and that, in fact,

TXI —SU . The free energy

S is entirely burned in the film region.

(z)

2. Viscous losses in rolling motion The flow patterns in a simple "wedge, " advancing with constant velocity and angle 8, [Fig. 31(a)], have been analyzed in a fundamental paper by Huh and Scriven (1971). They considered a very general case (arbitrary 8„ nonzero viscosity in the gas phase). Here we shall present only a simplified view, holding for small 8, and for negligible friction in the gas phase. This allows us to use the celebrated "lubrication approximation" of fluid mechanics. The idea is to treat the wedge as a nearly flat film, with a velocity profile

+

u„(z) =u (z)

of the Poiseuille type [Fig. 31(a)]. On the solid side,

vanishes and on the gas side dw/dz vanishes (no tangential stress). The velocity U of the contact line is the z average of this profile,

U=g

'

f dzu(z) .

/

/

+

/

(This may be checked by going to a frame moving with the line, where the solid slips at velocity —U, and where we find a steady state with 0 horizontal current. } One can Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July 1985

/

/

/

/ /+

FIG. 32. The extrapolation of slippage allowed

length b characterizes the amount in viscous flow near a solid surface.

[Page 28]

a. Finite slippage at the solid surface Instead of imposing zero velocity on the fluid (in the solid's frame) at the solid surface, it is natural to allow for a small amount of slippage, described by an extrapolation length b (Fig. 32). This may occur in various systems. (i) A porous solid, saturated with the same fluid, will allow for an exponential tail in the velocity field. This for instance, static contact ancould be found in nature gles have been studied on a "solid" made of a swollen silica gel (see Michaels and Dean, 1962) but has not been studied systematically. (ii) A rough solid surface may possibly be described along similar lines (Hocking, 1976). This, however, is not a very attractive situation, because roughness implies all the complications of hysteresis discussed in Sec. II.C. (iii) A normal liquid flowing over a smooth solid will display a length b comparable to the molecular size a. As we shall see, for this most important case, slippage is usually negligible, and the cutoff is provided by another effect (long-range VW forces). (iv) Special physicochemical processes near the contact line have been proposed by Ruckenstein and Dunn (1976). They also lead to b (v) A polymer melt, flowing on a smooth surface attachment between (without polymer any chemical chains and the wall), is expected to show anomalously large values of b (de Gennes, 1979a). This generates special "foot structures" near the contact line, which are analyzed in Sec. IV.D. A complete mechanical theory of macroscopic droplets spreading with finite slippage has been constructed by Huh and Mason (1977), and in more detail by Hocking (1977,1981) and Hocking and Rivers (1982). This theory is characterized by a matched asymptotic expansion between three regions a "foot" where slippage dominates, a "wedge" with nearly constant slope, and a "central region" where the droplet is close to a spherical cap. This last feature deserves comment. In the thicker regions of the droplet, the flows are easy, and the mechanical pressure pL equilibrates. The difference pL — pq between the pressures in and out of the drop is constant, and this, in turn, through the Laplace-Young equation, means that the curvature of the L/V surface is constant, hence the spherical cap. The work of Hocking provides a precise proof of the above statement. Quantitatively, as we shall see in Sec. IV. D, the result is simple: we of slippage on the logarithmic cutoff expect

-a.

x;„

x;„=bl8, .

These lead to precursor films, and the film provides a cutoff for the dissipation TX . In cases of dry spreading with 0, we shall see later that the cutoff is given by

S)

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

This dominates over slippage effects whenever the extrapolation length for slippage is comparable to the molecular size a [as can be seen by comparison of Eqs. (4.21) and (4.22)].

3. Structure and dissipation in the

precursor film

The idea that a film can move because of a gradient of the disjoining pressure 11 is not new (Deryagin, 1955; Lopez et al , 19.76; Starov, 1983). However, for the spreading of liquids on solids, progress, has been slow. A number of hydrodynamic flows have been solved numerically by Teletzke et al. (1983). The difficulty stems from the variety of experimental situations, revealed in the preceding paragraph. It is only by a patient separation of different physical regimes that one may hope to reach general laws (de Gennes, 1984a, 1984b, 1984c; Hervet and de Gennes, 1984). Let us concentrate, then, on a "pure" case: a nonpolar liquid, giving complete wetting, and attracted towards the solid by VW forces. Transfer through the vapor is assumed to be negligible. There are no solute impurities, and we also exclude the case of polymers (the extrapolation length b for slippage is then negligible). Gravity effects are omitted. Finally, we restrict our attention to a steady state regi-me, where the nominal contact line M moves with constant velocity ( —U) with respect to the solid (Fig. 31). We shall, in fact, work in the frame of the line, where the solid moves with a velocity + U. The choices of steady state, rather than transients, simplifies the equations enormously.

a. Hydrodynamic

equations

Our starting point will be the pressure distribution the film p (x, z), which has the following structure:

p =pG —Y

dz dx

+ W(g) —W(z),

in

where pG is the gas pressure; the second term represents the Young-Laplace capillary term. W(g) is the VW energy (per unit volume of liquid) between liquid and solid. In the nonretarded regime, which will be our main concern here, we have from Eq. (2.41)

W(z) = —11(z)

=- z

6m.

Locally Eq. (4.23) describes a hydrostatic equilibrium. The vertical force acting on any volume element vanishes, ap

b. van der Waals forces

+~jn =+ ~~@

aw =0.

The term W(g) in (4.23) ensures that p(g) reduces to the Laplace- Young value. In the lubrication the horizontal approximation, current Js (in the frame of the solid) is given by a Poiseuille formula:

[Page 29]

Bx In the frame of the line W this current becomes

J= Ug+ Js

For steady-state solutions, must be independent of x and t. In fact, for our problem (where there remains no film far ahead of the line W), must vanish exactly. This leads to the basic equation

dx

3qU

—y d g + W(g)

Equation (4.28) describes not one, but many types of precursors, depending on the value of the spreading coefficient S. However, before discussing all these possibilities, it is instructive to return first to the macroscopic limiti.e., to values of g that are large, so that W(g) becomes negligible. Then (4.28) reduces to an equation studied by Tanner (1979}. We are particularly interested in solutions that have zero curvature for large g (i.e. , that tend to behave nearly like a simple wedge in the macroscopic limit}. They have the asymptotic form

g(x) ~x

Gfx

qU ln

x)

I /3

and the slope varies very slowly with x. The constant x will be determined later by matching Eq. (4.29) with appropriate solutions (at x &0} which describe a precursor ilrn.

FIG. 33. A few numerical solutions of the film equation (4.33) for various values of the spreading and de Gennes, 1984). The larger larger films.

parameter

S (after Hervet

S values correspond

to the

important portion of the film, where the thickness is de') with distance. creasing only slowly (g- x

c. Crossover between the maximal and the macroscopic droplet

film

Let us first rescale (4.28) into an adimensional

form,

=X'

xp= 3 — /6aw —2/3

—31/6 aw — /3 —h"'h = 1 h'h

b. The "maximal" film

Let us consider first the profile marked M in Fig. 33. With this profile, we have a film that is present over all the solid surface. It will turn out that this "maximal" situation is relevant when the spreading coefficient S is positive and not too small (S»y8, ). For the "maximal" case, there is no contact line W„at the microscopic level, and the precursor is a nearly flat film. It is then permissible to drop the y term in Eq. (4.28) over the whole film region (x & 0). Using (4.24) for W(g), and the definition (2.50) of the molecular length a, we can then reduce Eq. (4.28) to the simple form

g2

dg dx

(x)=

This can be integrated fi1m profile:

immediately

w (x2 — x)

to give the maximal

where x2 is another integration constant, which we sha11 take to be equal to zero in what follows. We shall see that, in nearly all practical cases, Eq. (4.31) describes an Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July 1985

'7

. . The "maximal" solution correwhere h'=dh /dy sponds to h (y~ —oo )~0. There exists a one-parameter family of solutions of Eq. (4.33) which satisfies this condition, with the asymptotic form

(y

~ — = ——+ a exp(y /3 .

oo )

)

The a=0 solution corresponds to Eq. (4.31). The other solutions (a&0) are obtained by searching for small deviations from Eq. (4.31) and solving the corresponding linear Starting from Eq. equation in a WKBJ approximation. (4.34), one can extend the solutions h~(y) towards positive y by numerical integration of Eq. (4.33) (Hervet and de Gennes, 1984). One of these solutions (a=a-0. 38) has the limiting property

"(y~+ oo)=0 .

This is the solution of interest (because the curvatures on the macroscopic side are always very weak on the scale of the film). At large, positive y the solution h (y) does reach the asymptotic form announced in Eq. (4.29),

[Page 30]

:

(y)~yf '/'(y), f(y)—31n(0. 4y) .

Thus the cutoff length

x& defined

in Eq. (4.29) is

x i =2. Sxp

«x «R(t)].

~0

dX

Xp

and returning mula

f 1/3(1+f —1) ~ f

1/3

Xp

to Eq. (4.32) this gives the fundamental

8, =3fw .

for(4.38)

The main conclusions are the following. is nearly constant, and O, -w'/, as observed in (i) the low-velocity experiments of Hoffman (1975) and Tanner (1979}. An equation of this type was first derived theoretically by Fritz (1965), but for a slightly different problem (liquid spreading on a wet surface). It is probably fair to call Eq. (4.38) the Tanner law, because Tanner was the first to define it and to obtain it from experiments on a dry surface. He also interpreted his own experiments by similar ideas (although he did not take the precursor film into consideration). Of course, the exponent 3 in Eq. (4.38) is only approximate, because is logarithmically

dependent on w, but this is a minor refinement. (ii) The width of the crossover region between film and / droplet is of order xo — aw [Eq. (4.32)]. After making use of Eq. (4.38), this becomes

rp-—a/0, . (iii) The thickness go

with positive S does not spread on a dry solid down to a molecular layer, but in fact stops at a certain equilibrium thickness e (S) [Eq. (2.72)], 1/2

where xo is defined in Eq. (4.32) The most important observable is the apparent contact defined by a measurement at a macroscopic disangle Ustance x from the contact line W [x& ing (4.34), we find

e(S)=

It is natural to expect that the precursor film never thins down below this value. The maximal film solution is applicable only in the interval

e(S) &(&go.

Setting g=e(S} in Eq. (4.31), we have a formula for the film width d:

d=

we(S)

/2

These predictions are entirely confirmed by detailed numerical solutions of Eq. (4.33} (Hervet and de Gennes, 1984). The truncated solutions are shown in Fig. 33. They start at certain contact line W„of position x, = — d. The initial rise of the profile near x„ is parabolic and identical to the static solution [Eq. (2.55)]. At higher x the solution merges with the maximal profile, provided that d &&xp. The latter condition also shows up in Eq. (4.43). To have a film, we must satisfy

e(S) &go,

and this requirement is equivalent both to d &xp and to Eq. (4.41). In most practical cases we expect to have Eq. (4.41) well satisfied, in which case a film will indeed be present.

e. Oissipation in the film

of the film in the crossover region is

-—a/8, .

Thus the precursor film has reality (g~&&a) only for situations of small 0~. Typically 0, =10 and a =1 A, giving go —100 A (falling well into the range of nonretarded V%' interactions). d. Truncated films

We shall now show that the maximal film described above (covering the whole solid surface) corresponds to a certain limiting case of "dry" spreading, described by the inequality

S)) 2+0~ This can be easily understood if we return to the static discussion of Sec. II.D. %'e saw there that a VW fluid

This condition was not entirely appreciated work (de Gennes, 1984a) on the maximal film. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

in the original

A remarkable feature of the Tanner law (4.38) is that the value of the spreading coefficient S does not play any role (even in the log term). The only requirement is that the macroscopic profile cross over into a maximal film, and this, as we just saw, is satisfied whenever S~&yO, . The Tanner law expresses a certain relation between the flux U and the force F in the thermodynamic formulation of Eq. (4. 15). The spreading coefficient S is the dominant term in the force, so there is an apparent paradox. How does S drop out of the energy balance? The viscous dissipation computed from the hydrodynamic equation (4.28) does agree with Eq. (4. 15). The dissipation in an interval —oo &x &x „(where „ is in the macroscopic region } is exactly

x,„»xo

T(X +Xf)= J

dx .

x,

Using the truncated solutions plus suitable integrations by parts (Hervet and de Gennes, 1984), we can transform this exactly into Eq. (4. 15) (with the assumption TX~ =0). Thus we have not forgotten anything in the energy balance. But where is the free energy S dissipated? We shall find the answer through a qualitative estimate of the

[Page 31]

dx,

where we use an abrupt truncation at x = — d and also arbitrarily decide that the film stops exactly at x =0. We use the maximal film solution in this interval, in the form (4.30), and transform (4.47) into

The leading term comes from the lower limit and is

TXf —

28 (S)

—SU .

If ep is smaller than the precursor characteristic thickness go [Eq. (4.32)], the main effects should occur in the precursor region. Let us discuss them briefly, starting from the current in the frame of the line [Eq. (4.27}] dg J =Up —6rrgg dx

J= Uep . g(x) =

If eo is large (eo & 1000 A) we may omit all effects of long-range forces, and we are dealing only with capillary energies that are dissipated by viscous flows. This family of problems was discussed 1ong ago by Landau and Levich (1942; see Chap. 12 of the book by Levich, 1962). They were more concerned with a plate being pulled out of a liquid, while our present problem is the analog of a wet plate being pushed in, but the basic equations are the same. We may summarize the results by saying that the logarithmic cutoff discussed in Sec. IV.B.2 is now provided by the original film,

= p~~a

Inserting this into the wedge dissipation formula (4.20), we see that large x;„values correspond to a smaller logarithmic factor l, and should thus lead to larger velocities. An interesting feature is that the profile is not monotonous: we expect small capillary oscillations ahead of the nominal contact line W. Such an expectation arises from the linearized ((~co} steady-state equation, which is of third order and has exponential solutions with a complex leading to damped oscillations. These osdecay length cillations are, in fact, quite visible when moving a liquid in a prewetted test tube, ' and are shown in photographs

by Fritz (1965}.

' I am indebted to Y. Pomeau for one of these observations. Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July 1985

—exp(q Ix —x, }

where x2 is an integration

q=

a. Macroscopi c regime

This leads to a profile

4. Spreading over a wet surface (Bretherton, 1961; Fritz, 1965; Tanner, 1979) Let us return now to macroscopic droplets (or capillaries) and consider a solid that was initially covered with a liquid film of constant thickness (eo). On top of this we add, for instance, a droplet, and watch its spreading.

where we have used Eqs. (4.23) and (4.24). In steady state is constant, but the constant is now different from zero. In the far precursor region, the thickness /~co, and we must have

We now have the answer: all the excess free energy S is burned in the film. The remaining contribution to F, ' namely, —, yO„ is used up in the wedge, and imposes the relation (4.38) between reduced velocity (tU) and wedge angle O„where S does not appear.

xmin

b. Microscopi c regime

losses in the film only,

TXf —

constant, and

6m. pep U

(4.54}

The result (4.53) describes a crossover between the maximal precursor [Eq. (4.31)] found in the region g&eo (or x && 1) and an exponential tail, q x2 —

Px) —eo =eoexp( —q x —x2 » in the forward region (g — eo &&eo). We see that in the

limit eo &go, the matching of the macroscopic solutions will be imposed by the conventional precursor, and the preexistant film of thickness ep should have only weak effects on macroscopic flows. More detailed numerical discussions of the various regimes have been carried out by Teletzke et al. (1983).

c. Spreading

with

obstacles

The ideas sketched in Secs. IV.A. 4.a and IV.A. 4.b above could be tested by relatively simple experiments using uniformly wet surfaces. But their main impact may be different. Some macroscopic experiments show that a moving contact line has a velocity sensitive to perturbations on the solid surface which lie ahead of W. (i) Bangham and Saweris (1938) noticed that a drop of methyl alcohol spreading on mica was slowed down when reaching the vicinity of a drop of butyl alcohol. (ii) Lelah and Marmur (1981) showed that a water droplet spreading on a glass slide had its line W attracted towards the edge of the slide. This attraction was felt at distances —1 mm. All these situations are complex; one would like to know first what happens when two drops of the same liquid are spreading on a flat solid surface and on the verge of coalescing. Experimental studies on the macroscopic shapes would be easy to perform and (possibly) not too hard for theoretical analysis. Indeed, Teletzke, Davis, and Scriven (1984) have analyzed the Lelah-Marmur ex-

[Page 32]

periment (ii}. They can explain the sign of the effect if they assume for the disjoining pressure II(g} of water on ') extracted from empirical glass the slow decrease (II data by Pashley (1980).

CAP

-g

D. The special

ECURSOR

case of polymer melts

1. Observations We are concerned here with flexible polymer chains, which can exist in a liquid form and give complete spreading (S&0). To study these polymer drops is not very easy; one encounters at least two difficulties: high viscosities (if the chains are long) and impurity content (many practical polymer systems contain additives, or catalysts, from the fabrication process). This led to serious complications in the early experiments by Bascorn et al. (1964). However, the spreading of polymers such as silicone oils is important for many industries (paints, adhesives, protective coatings). Also, from a more fundamental point of view, we shall see that it raises a very special problem. Three main experiments indicate an anomalous behavior. (a) Early work by Schonhorn et al. (1966) showed that a certain characteristic length (independent of the original size Ro of the droplet) came into the spreading laws. Later work by the same group (Radigan et al. , 1974), using electron microscopy, displayed a "protruding foot" near the contact line W. (b) Ogarev et al. (1974) studied polydimethylsiloxane chains of high molecular weight (M —10 ) spreading on mica. (They had only one value of M, but they could vary the viscosity significantly by changing the temperature. ) Their main conclusion (from our point of view) was that the macroscopic shape of the drops is not a spherical cap, as it is with nonpolymeric, pure liquids. The deviation from sphericity is most significant for small droplet volumes. There is indeed a spherical cap region in the center, but the cap is surrounded by a protruding "foot" (Fig. 34). The foot is macroscopic and has nothing to do with the precursor of submicron thickness which was discussed in Sec. IV.C. (c) Sawicki (1978) carried out a series of systematic spreading with silicone drops of different chain lengths. His results on the apparent contact angle 0, (t) are not far from the Tanner law (8, — t ' '). However, when he compared the bulk viscosity to the apparent viscosity g, required to fit a wedge model, he found g, values that were too low. His interpretation was that the macromolecules were elongated in the film region, and that this led to a reduction of viscosities. But this non-Newtonian behavior is open to doubt at the very low shear stresses achieved in spreading. An alternate explanation will be presented below.

2. Interpretation

foot" has been a source of confusion To keep things straight, we must (i} carefully

The "protruding in the past.

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

FIG. 34. Qualitative

shape of a polymer melt during spreading.

discriminate between the foot and the precursor film (as explained above), and (ii) put in a different class the special profiles observed by Bascom et al. (1964), which are associated with volatile impurities.

a. Strong slippage The basic idea, proposed independently of all spreading phenomena (de Gennes, 1979a}, is that entangled polymers, flowing near a smooth, passive surface, should show a highly anomalous slippage, or, equivalently, a very large extrapolation length b (Fig. 32). Physically we may say that it is less expensive to concentrate the shear at the interface than to spread it over all the polymer/solid liquid (where entanglements oppose the shear very strongly). The resulting formula for b is

5 =ay/gp,

where a is a molecular size, gp is the viscosity of a liquid of monomers (with the same interactions, but no entangle-

ments), and ri is the melt viscosity (enormously by the entanglements).

enhanced

In the "reptation" model for molten polymers, one expects (de Gennes, 1979b)

Ip

where X is the number of monomers per chain, while N, is a characteristic number (the "number of monomers per

entanglement" ), of order 100. Experimental exponents are slightly higher than the value (3) predicted by (4.57), but the trend is clear: with high values of N(10 ), one can expect to find b values up to one millimeter. Early observations on the flow of polyethylene melts inside transparent capillaries give some support to these ideas (Gait and Maxwell, 1964). In these experiments, the velocity field was probed via tracer particles. It was found that the velocity at the well did not vanish in a significant fraction of the runs. Experiments by Kraynik and Schowalter (1981) detected the slip by hot film Burton et al. (1983) used a Weissenberg anemometry. rheogoniometer equipped with closely spaced parallel plates: for molten polystyrene (M —10 ) the data indicate b-60 pm. They are taken at relatively low shear rates: slippage does exist for Newtonian flows.

[Page 33]

P. G. de Gennes: Wetting: statics and dynamics

(in the nonretarded regime). Inserting this into Eq. (4.58), and solving, one obtains choosing g

b. Oroplet shapes (8roohard and de Gennes, 1984)

«b,

Let us focus our attention on the most important case, where the droplet thickness at the center (h) is much larger than b, but b itself is macroscopic (b & 1 pm). One then expects to find three regions. A spherical cap, where g »b. Here normal viscous flow takes place, slippage is negligible, and the apparent contact angle 8, should follow the Tanner law [Eq. (4.3}]. A macroscopic foot, where b & g&go. In this region we expect to find a "plug flow" of polymer driven by capillary forces. A precursor film, where go& g, which differs from the normal precursor of Sec. IV.C because the flow is again of the "plug" type. Let us start with the macroscopic domain. For finite b, the equation for the horizontal current J&, which replaces (4.26), is

7l

Bp

(b +g/3)

Bx

If we work in a macroscopic regime, the only effect contributing to Bp/Bx is capillarity, and the steady-state equation becomes

(b+ j/3)g—'" .

At g»b we recover Tanner's equation, and the profile is a spherical cap. At g«b, we can construct a special solution that describes the foot:

$ =8ix /3A, , A, =b/u) .

Here x is the horizontal distance measured from the nominal contact line M. In principle, the crossover between the foot [Eq. (4.61)] and the spherical cap (g& b) can be extracted from the work of Hocking (1977) and Hocking and Rivers (1982). For qualitative purposes, it is of the foot must be such enough to note that the width that Eq. (4.61), taken at x =f~, gives g b Thus-.

Ab

4ngU

x— x2

constant. Thus the thickness precursor should decrease even more ' ). Note slowly than in conventional fluids (g- ~x should be independent of that the prefactor ri/b =go/a molecular unweight (for entangled systems). The scaling form of the crossover length x2 is where x2 is an integration

of the maximal

x =(ab)' 8, A truncation of the maximal precursor at finite S should occur as in Sec. IV. C.3, but has not yet been explored.

3. Perspectives The existence of a macroscopic foot on spreading polyrner droplets appears as a natural consequence of plug that the extrapolation Aows. It must be emphasized length b, describing the plug flows, is very sensitive to the surface treatment (de Gennes, 1979a): if the surface is slightly rough, or if the surface can bind chemically to some of the chains (or to chain ends} b could be drastically reduced from the estimate (4.56). This means that a complete study of the spreading of polymer melts will require a delicate, coordinated effort between polymer science and surface science. On the theoretical side, many aspects of polymer melts The regimes at h & b remain completely unexplored. should not be ruled by the Tanner law, and may correspond to the observations of Schonhorn et a!. (1966). Moreover, the discussion on surface friction, leading to Eq. (4.56) for b, has been carried out only in the limit of ). With silicone oils of strongly entangled chains (N low N, which are of some practical interest, one needs an estimate of b in the opposite limit (N &N, }. We still exof b, and Eq. (4.56) may even pect an enhancement remain qualitatively valid, but to prove this will require a delicate study of chain flow near a passive wall, which (fortunately} was not required in the entangled limit.

»N,

&

f =(Ab )' '= bw =-bg The logarithmic cutoff discussed in Sec. IV.B is now expected to be x;„-f, , as announced in Eq. (4.21).

E. Spreading laws for superfluid

He4

'

c. The polymer precursor

If we now go to a microscopic regime, where VW forces become dominant, the equation for the maximal film is obtained by ignoring capillarity and setting ag Bx

2~g4 Bx

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

A long experimental effort has been devoted to the statics of the Rollin film, and also to the small-amplitude oscillations of the film surface ("third sound"). Some studies have also been carried out on transport (from one reservoir to another, at a different level) via the film (see the review by Brewer, 1978). But we do not know of any observation on the horizontal spreading of droplets. On the theoretical side, a recent study (Joanny, 1985) analyzes the motion in a simple inertial regime, at very low temperatures (no normal fluid, and no evaporation), without any vortex nucleation. All the work is restricted to the special case S=O. We shall concentrate here on the m. acroseopi c regime.

[Page 34]

A force balance argument predicts that the dynamic contact angle vanishes. This property is in fact similar to Eq. (4.61) for polymer flow (dg/dx =0 at the nominal line position W), and the physical origin is the same: in both cases we have a plug flow and no singularity [in the or in the horizontal forces hydrostatic dissipation, Bp/Bx)) near the line W. Thus the balance of forces g( — at W is of the Young type, with no added terms, and

8, =8, =0.

Let us, then, consider a droplet of original volume Q -=Ra, spreading to a distance R (t) »Ru, under the sole action of capillary forces. The initial capillary energy was of order PRO. When this is transformed into kinetic energy, with rms velocity U, we have

Q —,pL U =yRp,

' 1/2

pLRp

The final velocity of the line W should be constant and given by Eq. (4.68). The detailed shape of the droplet is not simple, but (within the lubrication approximation) Joanny was able to construct exact, self-similar solutions with 0, =0 and with the velocity (4.68). It would be of interest for the future to investigate the stability of these self-similar solutions. The (more realistic) case where S is positiue remains It may be that the energy S is completely unexplored. spent in the form of vortex lines nucleated at the solid wall.

F. Unsolved problems

1. Pure fluids We have seen that a consistent picture may be constructed for the dry spreading of a simple fluid on a solid. On the other hand, we noticed that the situation of moist spreading requires the specification of a control parameter [H in the notation of Eq. (2.46)] and is thus not unique. There remains, however, a long list of open questions connected with the spreading of pure fluids, some of which are specified below. (a) Long-range forces other than uan der Waa1s may come into play (especially double-layer effects, if the liquid is water). (b) All our discussion assumed that the local dissipation TX&,l near the moving contact line was negligible. This need not be true. Let us list again the different types of dissipation (Sec. IV. C. 1):

TXf ——SU, TX~ = —, yO~ U-

U2

L9,

In Eq. (4.71) we tentatively assumed that the local term could be described in terms of a simple friction coefficient Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

ril (which turns out to have the physical dimensions of a viscosity). If this assumption is correct, we usually expect the hierarchy is that, in the limit 0,

~0,

TX)

) TX~ ) TXl

provided that L9,

(g/g( .

(4.73}

But this statement may be useless if the local friction cannot be described in the form (4.71), or if the coefficient gl is much larger than ri [so that the conditions (4.73) never hold in practice). A complete understanding of the local process will probably require calculations of molecular dynamics on specific examples. (c) Flow instabilities may occur, even with viscous fluids. Optical observations (1977} on by Williams spreading droplets of various fluids show a wiggly contact line. This may be interpreted in (at least) three different ways: inhomogeneities in the solid surface (see the discussion on a static contact line in Sec. II); solute impurity effects (see Sec. IV. F.2 below); fundamental instabilities in precursor flow: it could be that the films described in Sec. IV.C.3 are intrinsically unstable, even for a pure liquid. (d) Transfer uia the uapor may be important even in dry spreading. Although the solid well ahead of the contact line is dry, it may receive a few molecules evaporated from the liquid interface. Even for mildly volatile liquids, this process may renormalize the effective value of the spreading parameter S. Our analysis suggests that this has not much effect on the Tanner law, but that it will change the width d of the precursor film. (e) All our discussion ignored mechanical losses in the gas phase. As early as 1971 Huh and Scriven pointed out that even a gas may become important in the limit of U & V", where 6), ~m. , and where we are actually dealing with a thin film of gas squeezed between liquid and solid. These effects become even more spectacular if we are not with dealing, but rather with liquid/gas, liquid/liquid system. Pismen and Nir (1982) observed that a simple wedge solution was not acceptable in the macroscopic regime, and that self-similar solutions led to strange "spiral" configurations. Pumir and Pomeau (1984} propose a set of traveling waves following the contact line. This should be checked by experiments on consolute mixtures.

2. Effects of additives

in the liquid

a. Volatile impunties Their role in spreading was noticed early in the optical studies of Bascom et al. (1964): certain precursor structures occurred only with impure liquids. The explanation of Bascom et al. of these results is based on a local gradient of the surface tension, induced by evaporation near the tip. This interpretation is very plausible. It may be, however, that in some cases the renormalization of S by described in Sec. IV.F. l.c above plays a vapor signals

role.

[Page 35]

P. G. de Gennes: N/etting: b. Surfactants When they are insoluble in the bulk liquid, surfactants in films interfaces at the various only appear (S/L, S/V, L/V). If we know the surface concentrations I;J in these various films, the conservation law gives a condition on the hydrodynamic velocities. Consider, for instance, the very simple case where I LV=—I is finite, while I qL and I gy vanish. Then the velocity at the free surface of the liquid must be just equal to the line velocity U, so that the surfactant "never catches up" with the line. This, in turn, imposes a certain modification of the velocity profile in the liquid film and a change of the numerical coefficients in the Tanner law (4.20). Considerations of this type were already present in the work of Huh and Scriven (1971). For many practical purposes, the effects of surfactants For instance Lelah and are much more spectacular. Marmur (1981) find that a small amount of surfactant (above the critical micelle concentration) gives rise to a A well-known instability in spreading. hydrodynamic class of experiment makes use of a surfactant that attaches slowly to the S/I. interface and makes it hydrophobic: a droplet spreads and then retracts. All these effects will require good models of adsorption/desorption molecules or involvkinetics (involving single-surfactant ing micelles).

c. polymers In solution, polymers also can be adsorbed on the S/L interface (and/or on the L/V interface). All the effects Moreover, the hydroabove may appear. mentioned dynamic extrapolation length b of Fig. 32 may be drastically reduced by polymer adsorption. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The first version of this review was based on a course given in Paris during 1983 1984, and I wish to thank the participants for their active criticism. Discussions with J. F. Joanny, F. Brochard, and H. Hervet were essential for I have also the construction of a common viewpoint. greatly benefi ted from written exchanges and/or ora1 disputes with D. Beaglehole, D. Chan, T. 13avis, E. Dussan V. , R. Evans, H. Frisch, S. Garoff, B. Hughes, J. IsC. Knobler, B. Legait, A. Marmur, B. raelashvili, Maxwell, M. Moldover, M. Nightingale, B. Ninham, Y.

Pomeau, F. Rondelez, L. Saraga, M. Schick, L. Schwartz, C. Taupin, G. Teletzke, and B. Widom. A critical reading of the manuscript by M. Adam and by D. Huse has been of considerable help.

REFERENCES Adamson, A. , and A. Zebib, 1980, J. Phys. Chem. 84, 2619. Bangham, D., and S. Saweris, 1938, Trans. Faraday Soc. 34,

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July f985

Bascom, W. , R. Cottington, and C. Singleterry, 1964, in Contact Angle, Wettability and Adhesion, edited by F. M. Fowkes, Advances in Chemistry Series, No. 43 (American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C.), p. 355. Beaglehole, D. , 1983, J. Phys. Chem. 87, 4749. Benner, R. E., G. F. Teletzke, L. E. Scriven, and H. T. Davis, 1984, J. Chem. Phys. 80, 589. Berry, M. , 1974, J. Phys. A 7, 231. Bouasse, H. , 1924, Capillarite et phenomenes superficiels (Delagrave, Paris). Bretherton, F. P. , 1961, J. Fluid Mech. 10, 166. Brewer, D. F., 1978, in The Physics of Liquid and Solid Helium, edited by K. Benneman and J. Ketterson (Wiley, New York), Part II, p. 573. Brezin, E., B. I. Halperin, and S. Leibler, 1983a, J. Phys. (Paris) 44, 775. Brezin, E., B. I. Halperin, and S. Leibler, 1983b, Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1387. Brochard, F., and P. G. de Gennes, 1984, J. Phys. (Paris) Lett. 45, L597. Brockway, L., and R. Jones, 1964, in Contact Angle, Wettability and Adhesion, edited by F. M. Fowkes, Advances in Chemistry Series, No. 43 (American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C.), p. 275. Burton, R. H. , M. J. Folkes, K. A. Narh, and A. Keller, 1983, J. Mater. Sci. 18, 315. Cahn, J. W. , 1977, J. Chem. Phys. 66, 3667. Callaghan, I ~, D. Everett, and J. P. Fletcher, 1983, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans. 79, 2723. Callaghan, I. C., and K. W. Baldry, 1978, in Wetting, Spreading and Adhesion, edited by J. F. Padday (Academic, New York). Chang, W. V. , Y. M. Chang, L. J. Wang, and Z. G. Wang, 1982, Organic Coatings and Applied Polymer Science Proceedings (American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C. ), Vol. 47. Chappuis, J., 1984, in Multiphase Science and Technology, edited by G. F. Hewitt, J. Delhaye, and N. Zuber (Hemisphere, New York), p. 387. Cohn, R., and D. Jacobs, 1983, J. Chem. Phys. 80, 856. Cooper, W. , and W. Nuttal, 1915, J. Agr. Sci. 7, 219. Cox, R. G. , 1983, J. Fluid Mech. 131, 1. de Gennes, P. G., 1979a, C. R. Acad. Sci. Ser. B 288, 219. de Gennes, P. G., 1979b, Scaling Concepts in Po1ymer Physics (Cornell University, Ithaca). de Gennes, P. G., 1981, J. Phys. (Paris) Lett. 42, 37'7. de Gennes, P. G. , 1983, C. R. Acad. Sci. 297 II, 9. de Gennes, P. G., 1984a, C. R. Acad. Sci. 298 II, 111. de Gennes, P. G. , 1984b, C. R. Acad. Sci. 298II, 439. de Gennes, P. G. , 1984c, C. R. Acad. Sci. 298 II, 475. de Gennes, P. G. , 1984d, C. R. Acad. Sci. 300II, 129. Deryagin, B., 1940, Zh. Fiz. Khim. 14, 137. Deryagin, B., 1955, Kolloidn. Zh. 17, 191. This review describes the pioneering work of the Russian School. Deryagin, B., and N. Churaev, 1976, Kolloidn. Zh. 38, 438. Deryagin B., Z. Zorin, N. Churaev, and V. Shishin, 1978, in Wet ting, Spreading and Adhesion, edited by J. F. Padday (Academic, New York). Dettre, R. , and R. Johnson, 1964, in Contact Angle, 8ettability and Adhesion, edited by F. M. Fowkes, Advances in Chemistry Series, No. 43 (American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C.), p. 136. Dietrich, S., and M. Schick, 1984, Phys. Rev. 8 (in press). Dussan, V. E., 1979, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 11, 371. Dussan, V. E., and S. Davis, 1974, J. Fluid Mech. 65, 71. Dussan, V. E., and C. Ngan, 1982, J. Fluid Mech. 118, 27.

[Page 36]

Dzyaloshinskii, I. E., E. M. Lifshitz, and L. P. Pitaevskii, 1961, Adv. Phys. 10, 165. Ebner, C., and W. F. Saam, 1977, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 1486. Ebner, C., W. F. Saam, and A. K. Sen, 1984 (to be published). Evans, R., and U. Marini, 1985, Chem. Phys. Lett. 114, 415. Evans, R. , and P. Tarazona, 1984, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 557. Fowkes, F. M. , 1962, J. Phys. Chem. 66, 382. Fowkes, F. M. , 1964, Ed. , Contact A ngle, Wettabi li ty and Adhesion, Advances in Chemistry Series, No. 43 (American Chemical Society, Washington, D. C.) Fox, H. , and W. Zisman, 1950, J. Colloid Sci. 5, 514. Fritz, G. , 1965, Z. Ang. Phys. 19, 374. Frumkin, A. , 1938, J. Phys. Chem. USSR 12, 337. Gait, J., and B. Maxwell, 1964, Mod. Plastics, No. 12. Garoff, S., and L. Schwartz, 1984, private communication. Ghiradella, H. , W. Radigan, and H. L. Frisch, 1975, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 51, 522. Girifalco, L. A. , and R. J. Good, 1957, J. Phys. Chem. 61, 904. Gittes, F., and M. Schick, 1984, Phys. Rev. B 30, 209. Good, R. J., 1964, Contact Angle, Wettability and Adhesion, Advances in Chemistry Series, No. 43 (American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C. ), p. 74. Grinstein, G. , and S. K. Ma, 1983, Phys. Rev. B 28, 2588. Guyon, E., J. Prost, C. Betrencourt, C. Boulet, and B. Volochine, 1982, Eur. J. Phys. 3, 159. Hardy, W. , 1919, Philos. Mag. 38, 49. Hauge, E., and M. Schick, 1983, Phys. Rev. B 27, 4288. Heady, R., and J. Cahn, 1972, J. Chem. Phys. 58, 896. Hervet, H. , and P. G. de Gennes, 1984, C. R. Acad. Sci 299II,

Hocking, L. M. , 1976, J. Fluid Mech. 76, 801. Hocking, L. M. , 1977, J. Fluid Mech. 79, 209. Hocking, L. M. , 1981, g. J. Mech. App. Math. 34, 37. Hocking, L. M. , and A. Rivers, 1982, J. Fluid Mech. 121, 425. Hoffman, R., 1975, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 50, 228. Huh, C., and S. G. Mason, 1977, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 60, 11. Huh, C., and L. E. Scriven, 1971, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 35,

J. F., and P. G. de Gennes,

1984b, C. R. Acad. Sci.

299 II, 279. Joanny,

Lelah, M. , and A. Marmur,

1981, J Colloid Interface Sci. 82,

2nd ed. Levich, V. , 1962, Physi ochemical Hydrodynamics, (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey). Lipowsky, R., and D. M. Kroll, 1984, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 2303. Lopez, J., C. Miller, and E. Ruckenstein, 1976, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 56, 460. Lyklema, J., 1967, in Study Week on Molecular Forces, edited by Pontifical Academy of Science (North-Holland, Amsterdam and Wiley-Interscience, New York), pp. 181 and 221. Marmur, A. , 1983, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 19, 75. Mason, S. G., 1978, in Wetting, Spreading and Adhesion, edited by J. F. Padday (Adademic, New York), p. 321. Michaels, A. , and S. Dean, 1962, J. Phys. Chem. 66, 1790. Moldover, M. , and J. Cahn, 1980, Science 207, 1073. Moldover, M. , and R. Gammon, 1983, J. Chem. Phys. 80, 528. Moldover, M. , and J. Schmidt, 1983, J. Chem. Phys. 79, 379. Nakanishi, H. , and M. Fisher, 1982, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1565. Nightingale, M. P. , W. F. Saam, and M. Schick, 1983, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1275 Ogarev, V. , T. Timonina, V. Arslanov, and A. Trapeznikov, 1974, J. Adhesion 6, 337. Oliver, J., C. Huh, and S. Mason, 1977, J Adhesion 8, 223. Overbeek, J. T. G. , and A. Van Silfhout, 1967, in Study Week on Molecular Forces, edited by Pontifical Academy of Sciences (North-Holland, Amsterdam and Wiley-Interscience, New York), p. 143 Owens, N. F., P. Richmond, and J. Mingins, 1978, in Wetting, Spreading and Adhesion, edited by J. F. Padday (Academic, New York), p. 127. Padday, J. F., 1978, Ed. , Wetting, Spreading and Adhesion (Academic, New York). Pandit, R., M. Schick, and M. Wortis, 1982, Phys. Rev. B 26,

Pashley, R. M. , 1980, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 78, 246. Pismen, L. M. , and A. Nir, 1982, Phys. Fluids 25, 3 Platikhanov, D., M. Nedyalkov, and A. Schelduko, 1980a, J. Colloid Interface Sci 75, 612. Platikhanov, D. , M. Nedyalkov, and A. Schelduko, 1980b, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 75, 620. Plesner, I., and O. Platz, 1968, J. Chem. Phys. 48, 5361, footnote II. Pohl, D. , and W. Goldburg, 1982, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1111. Pomeau, Y., 1983, C. R. Acad. Sci. 298II, 29. Pomeau, Y., and J. Vannimenus, 1984, J. Colloid Interface Sci. (to be published). Privrnan, V. , 1984, J. Chem. Phys. 81, 2463. Pumir, A. , and Y. Pomeau, 1984, C. R. Acad. Sci. (to be published). Radigan, W. , H. Ghiradella, H. L. Frisch, H. Schonhorn, and T. K. Kwei, 1974, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 49, 241. Renk, F., P. C. Wayner, Jr. , and G. M. Homsy, 1978, J. Colloid

Huse, D., 1984, private communication. Hyppia, J., 1948, Anal. Chem. 20, 1039. Imry, J., and S. K. Ma, 1975, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35, 1399. Israelashvili, J. N. , 1982, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci 16, 31. Israelashvili, J. N. , 1984, private communication. Joanny, J. F., 1985, These, Universite Paris VI. Joanny, J. F., and P. G. de Gennes, 1984a, J. Chem. Phys. 81,

Joanny,

J. F., and P. G. De Gennes, 1984c, C. R. Acad. Sci.

299II, 605. Johnson, R., and R. Dettre, 1964, in Contact Angle, Wettability and Adhesion, edited by F. M. Fowkes, Advances in Chemistry Series, No. 43 (American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C.), p. 112. Kravnik, A. M. , and W. R. Schowalter, 1981, J. Rheology 25,

Kroll, D. M. , and T. R. Meister, 1984, Phys. Rev. B (in press). Landau, L. D. , and V. G. Levich, 1942, Acta Physicochim. URSS 17, 42. Langmuir, I ~, 1938, J. Chem. Phys. 6, 893. Law, B., 1984 (unpublished) Legait, B., and P. G. de Gennes, 1984, J. Phys. (Paris) Lett. 45, Leibler, S., 1984, These, Orsay.

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part I, July 1985

Interface Sci. 67, 408. Ross, S., and R. Kornbrekke, 1984, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 99, Rowlinson, J. S., J. A. Barker, and D. Henderson, 1981, private communication. Rowlinson, J. S., and B. Widom, 1982, Molecular Theory of Capillarity (Oxford University, New York/London). Ruckenstein, E., and M. Dunn, 1976, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 56, 460; 59, 137. Sawicki, G. , 1978, in W'etting, Spreading and Adhesion, edited by J. F. Padday (Academic, New York), p. 36. Schonhorn, H. , H. L. Frisch, and T. K. Kwei, 1966, J. Applied

[Page 37]

Phys. 37, 4967. Snook, I. K., and W. Van Megen, 1979, J. Chem. Phys. 70,

Snook,

I. K., and W. Van Megen, 1980, J. Chem. Phys. 72,

Starov, V. M. , 1983, Kolloidnyi J. 45, 1154. Sullivan, D. E., 1979, Phys. Rev. B 20, 3991. Sullivan, D. E., 1982, Phys. Rev. A 25, 1669. Sullivan, D. E., and M. Telo da Gama, 1985, in F!uctuation Fffects on Surfaces, edited by C. A. Croxston (Wiley, New York). Tanner, L., 1979, J. Phys. D 12, 1473. Tarazona, P. , and R. Evans, 1983, Mol. Phys. 48, 799. Tarazona, P. , M. Telo da Gama, and R. Evans, 1983, Mol Phys. 49, 283. Teletzke, G. F., H. T. Davis, and L. E. Scriven, 1984, J. Colloid Interface Sci. (to be published).

Rev. Mod. Phys. , Vol. 57, No. 3, Part l, July 1985

Teletzke, G. F., L. E. Scriven, and H. T. Davis, 1982, J. Chem. Phys. 77, 5794. Teletzke, G. F., L. E. Scriven, and H. T. Davis, 1983, J. Chem. Phys. 78, 1431. Telo da Gama, M. , 1984, Mol. Phys. 52, 585. Trillat, J. and R. Fritz, 1937, J. Chim. Phys. 35, 45. Tverkrem, J., and D. Jacobs, 1983, Phys. Rev. A 27, 2773. Wayner, P. C., 1982, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 88, 294. Williams, R. , 1977, Nature 266, 153. Young, T., 1805, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 95, 65. Zabel, H. , B. Schonfeld, and, S. Moss, 1981, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 42, 897. Zisman, W. , 1964, in Contact Angle, S'ettability and Adhesion, edited by F. M. Fowkes, Advances in Chemistry Series, No. 43 (American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C. ), p. 1.
