[Page 1]

pubs.acs.org/JCTC

Cite This: J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019, 15, 2071вҲ’2086

Evaluation of Predicted ProteinвҲ’Protein Complexes by Binding Free Energy Simulations Till Siebenmorgen and Martin Zacharias* Physik-Department T38, Technische UniversitГӨt MГјnchen, James-Franck-Strasse 1, 85748 Garching, Germany

Downloaded via KYOTO UNIV on May 30, 2023 at 04:41:38 (UTC). See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

S Supporting Information *

ABSTRACT: The accurate prediction of proteinвҲ’protein complex geometries is of major importance to ultimately model the complete interactome of interacting proteins in a cell. A major bottleneck is the realistic free energy evaluation of predicted docked structures. Typically, simple scoring functions applied to single-complex structures are employed that neglect conformational entropy and often solvent effects completely. The binding free energy of a predicted proteinвҲ’ protein complex can, however, be calculated using umbrella sampling (US) along a predefined dissociation/association coordinate of a complex. We employed atomistic USmolecular dynamics simulations including appropriate conformational and axial restraints and an implicit generalized Born solvent model to calculate binding free energies of a large set of docked decoys for 20 different complexes. Free energies associated with the restraints were calculated separately. In principle, the approach includes all energetic and entropic contributions to the binding process. The evaluation of docked complexes based on binding free energy calculation was in better agreement with experiment compared to a simple scoring based on energy minimization or MD refinement using exactly the same force field description. Even calculated absolute binding free energies of structures close to the native binding geometry showed a reasonable correlation to experiment. However, still for a number of complexes docked decoys of lower free energy than near-native geometries were found indicating inaccuracies in the force field or the implicit solvent model. Although time consuming the approach may open up a new route for realistic ranking of predicted geometries based on calculated free energy of binding.

changes.8,14,15 This can for, instance, be targeted using soft contacts, i.e., reducing the energy potentials at sterical contacts,16,17 employing soft coarse-grained force fields,18вҲ’20 or incorporating site chain flexibility21,22 or possible global motions based on soft collective modes.23вҲ’25 Frequently, a refinement step is employed on a subset of solutions obtained in the first systematic docking approach to obtain higher quality solutions. Experimental data also can help to limit the selected subset of putative solutions. Several refinement methods based on Monte Carlo (MC) or molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been developed in recent years.26вҲ’30 The final identification of the most realistic predicted complex involves a scoring function that ideally represents directly the binding affinity of the bound protein partners. Common scoring functions use either force field based approaches, i.e., scoring functions that are based on a physical model for the potential energy functions,10,21,26,31 or empirical scoring approaches, which incorporate experimental data in a statistical scoring.12,19,32,33 Typically, a scoring function involves the evaluation of one complex structure and therefore neglects

INTRODUCTION ProteinвҲ’protein interactions play a key role in basically all cellular processes, ranging from signal transduction to enzymatic transformations and transport phenomena. Understanding the three-dimensional (3D) structure of proteinвҲ’protein complexes is of major importance for understanding the molecular mechanism of many diseases and to identify potential targets for drug design.1вҲ’3 Structure determination of proteinвҲ’protein complexes at high resolution and binding affinity measurements are challenging experimentally and for transient interactions not always possible.4,5 The theoretical prediction of the structure of proteinвҲ’protein complexes is not less challenging due to the complicated shape of proteins, the variety of interactions, and possible conformational changes associated with binding.6вҲ’8 A large variety of docking methods are available to generate putative complexes based on the unbound protein or modeled protein conformations.8,9 Simple scoring functions are typically used during the systematic search in the six degrees of freedom (three translational and three rotational) of possible relative placements to rank predicted solutions.9вҲ’13 Large efforts have been made to introduce flexibility of the proteins in docking schemes since a major limiting factor of most rigid docking methods is induced-fit conformational В© 2019 American Chemical Society

Received: October 10, 2018 Published: January 30, 2019

[Page 2]

each US window) because the solvent response is instantaneous for each sampled structure. We demonstrate that it is possible to directly employ such binding free energy simulations to score a reasonable set of 50 preselected complexes for a series of 20 test cases within a day on a GPU cluster. This demonstrates a basis for systematic evaluation of predicted complexes based on calculated binding free energies instead of single-point interaction or knowledge-based scores or mean interaction energies. We compared the docking ranking based on calculated binding free energies with simple one-point energy evaluation of energy-minimized complexes and after MD-based refinement of docked complexes and compare the results to experimental binding free energies.

any entropic contributions to the restricted conformational flexibility and translational/rotational mobility of the partner molecules. Furthermore, most scoring functions consist of pairwise additive terms and often neglect or only approximately account for solvent effects. In recent years, approaches with full atomic resolution of the binding partners and a continuum model for the surrounding solvent have been applied to evaluate docked complexes.34вҲ’36 Instead of scoring only one complex an ensemble of complex geometries is evaluated in molecular mechanics PoissonвҲ’ Boltzmann/surface area (MM-PBSA) or MM-GBSA (using the generalized Born method instead of the PoissonвҲ’Boltzmann) approaches. 37 For each complex structure the partner interaction energy is calculated and electrostatics are obtained using the finite-difference PoissonвҲ’Boltzmann or generalized Born equations. Hydrophobic contributions are calculated from the buried solvent-accessible surface upon complex formation. A mean over the ensemble results in a calculated score. MM-GBSA and MM-PBSA have been used successfully to improve the prediction of near-native proteinвҲ’protein complex geometries.35 However, MM-GBSA or MMPBSA are end-point methods that only give a mean interaction energy between partners without taking into account the energetic changes within each partner upon binding and also usually do not account for changes in the conformational entropy upon binding. In addition, interaction energies obtained from MMPBSA can show large statistical errors due to numerically small interaction energies that need to be calculated from subtraction of numerically large and slowly converging mean energies (of the complex and the individual partners). For example, Gohlke et al.34 investigated the Ras-Raf and Ras-RalGDS complex and reported errors of calculated binding free energies of about 6 kcal/mol corresponding to about one-third of the calculated total binding free energy.34 However, using MD simulations there are rigorous approaches of calculating relative or even absolute binding free energies based, for example, on umbrella sampling (US) along a dissociation (or association) coordinate.38вҲ’42 The convergence of calculating the free energy of dissociation/ association along a typical distance coordinate can be enhanced by adding restraints to the relative orientation and conformational freedom of the binding partners.39 By adding contributions due to restraining degrees of freedom to the potential of mean force along the reaction coordinate it is in principle possible to extract an absolute binding free energy. In contrast to MM-PBSA or MM-GBSA such approach includes all energetic and entropic contributions to binding and, hence, is ideal for ranking of binding modes. Typically and preferably, US free energy simulations are performed on ligandвҲ’receptor or proteinвҲ’protein complexes including explicit solvent. However, only a few but quite successful applications to proteinвҲ’protein or peptideвҲ’protein binding have so far been published,41,43 i.e., due to the large computational demand of explicit solvent MD simulations. It should be emphazised since such simulations can take several days for a single binding mode and application for systematic evaluation of many docked proteinвҲ’protein complexes is out of reach with current resources. However, instead of using an explicit solvent representation it is also possible to perform US-based binding free energy simulations at atomic resolution in an implicit generalized Born (GB) solvent.44,45 On modern graphical processing units (GPUs) GB simulations can be performed very efficiently46 and also allow for faster convergence than explicit solvent simulations (in

MATERIALS AND METHODS ProteinвҲ’Protein Docking Using ATTRACT. Since umbrella sampling simulations for evaluation of docked complexes are computationally highly demanding it was necessary to limit the number of systems to a set of 20 complexes from the protein docking benchmark 547 (Table 1) Table 1. Table of the 20 Protein Complexes Analyzed in This Study with According PDB id and Difficulty (as defined in the benchmark47) PDB

difficulty

protein 1

7cei 1ak4 1ay7 1ppe

rigid body rigid body rigid body rigid body

Colicin E7 nuclease Cyclophilin Rnase SA trypsin

1r0r 2i25

1qa9 1gcq 2oob 1ffw

rigid body subtilisin carlsberg rigid body shark single-domain antigen receptor rigid body Arf1 GTPase.GNP-RanBD1 rigid body RAB4 binding domain of Rabenosyn rigid body CD2 rigid body GRB2 C-ter SH3 domain rigid body ubiquitin ligase rigid body chemotaxis protein CheY

1zhi

rigid body BAH domain of Orc1

3a4s

rigid body SUMO-conjugating enzyme UBC9 rigid body elastase rigid body subtilisin rigid body ovomucoid inhibitor third domain medium spliceosomal U5 15 kDa protein medium BET3 rigid body N-term of DsbD

1j2j 1z0k

1fle 2sni 3sgq 1syx 2cfh 1z5y

protein 2 Im7 immunity protein HIV capsid Barstar CMTI-1 squash inhibitor OMTKY lysozyme GAT domain of GGA1 Rab4A GTPase CD58 Vav N-ter SH3 domain ubiquitin chemotaxis protein CheA Sir Orc-interaction domain NFATC2-interacting protein elafin chymotrypsin inhibitor 2 Streptogrisin B CD2 receptor binding protein 2 TPC6 E. coli CCMG protein

with small partner structures. For each system, the bound and unbound conformations of both partners are known. The docking was performed using the unbound partner structures with the program ATTRACT.18,20 A standard docking protocol with rigid partner proteins and grid acceleration for fast energy evaluation was used.48 After the final docking scoring step (based on the ATTRACT scoring potential), the 300 topranked complexes were considered. We distinguish between receptor and ligand protein according to the assignment in the benchmark 547 (typically the large protein partner is the

[Page 3]

harmonic intramolecular RMSD restraints of the CОұ atoms were applied as during MD refinement (force constant 0.05 kcal/molВ· Г…2 per atom). First, an initial series of MD simulations for 20вҲ’60 ps (per window) was performed with a separation along the reaction coordinate from 0.15 to 0.5 Г… between the windows. In each run the coordinates and velocities of the previous window were used as starting conditions. The data gathering in each US window was extended to 1 ns, which allowed in general good overlap of sampled distance distributions and rapid convergence of the calculated PMF (see Supporting Information Figures S3вҲ’S4). A great advantage of the US technique is that it is possible to add additional windows after a fist inspection of the distribution overlap between neighboring US windows to improve the sampling in regions with too little sampled distance overlap between neighboring windows. Occasional new US windows were added to improve the convergence. Furthermore, due to the differences in the interaction strength of the protein partners in the different complexes the force constants and spacing were adjusted and slightly vary for each case due to variation in the slope of the free energy curves (steep or weakly varying PMF) (Table 2). Finally, the potentials of mean force (free energy

receptor and the smaller is the ligand partner). For evaluation of the deviation of a decoy complex from the native geometry we use the RMSD (root-mean-square deviation of the complex after best superposition of the complex to the native complex structure, only the CОұ atoms considered). The 50 models with lowest RMSD to the native complex structure were used for further evaluation based on atomistic simulations. Refinement of Docking Solutions Using Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Atomistic refinement of docked complexes was performed with the Amber16 Molecular Dynamics (MD) Package49 using the pmemd.cuda module46 in combination with the ff14SB50 force field for proteins following a standard protocol developed previously.28 Energy minimization and MD simulations employed the generalized Born implicit solvent model (igb = 8 in the Amber input section) and an infinite cutoff. Energy minimization consisted of 2500 minimization steps (400 steps of steepest descent, 2100 steps of conjugate gradient). Scoring after minimization was performed by subtracting the potential energy of the partners from the energy of the complex. For further MD refinement the systems were heated in three steps (each 5 ps) to 300 K using a Langevin thermostat for temperature scaling. For the production run (mass weighted) RMSD restraints of the CОұ atoms of each individual protein were applied (force constant 10 000 kcal/mol Г…2 for each protein) together with a small distance restraint (force constant 0.5 kcal/mol Г…2) between the COM of ligand and the receptor that prevents the protein partners from dissociating. Finally, weak distance restraints between the CОұ atoms at the interface of the proteins were applied in order to gently push the binding partners toward each other (force constant 0.25 kcal/mol Г…2). The purpose of the restraints during the MD simulation is to avoid dissociation due to possible initial sterical overlap and to improve the sterical complementarity at the interface. In total, the refined structures were simulated for 30 ps and evaluated after a final minimization for another 2500 steps. On average, the refinement of 50 models took approximately 1 h on a PC with a GeForce GTX 1080 for the different proteins. Restraint Umbrella Sampling. The complexes obtained after the MD-based refinement served as the starting structures for the umbrella sampling (US) simulations (details on the calculations of absolute binding free energies are given in Supporting Information). The same temperature and solvent conditions as for the refinement were used. The center of mass distance between ligandвҖҷs and receptorвҖҷs CОұ atoms served as the

Table 2. Umbrella Sampling Simulation Setups for Each ProteinвҲ’Protein Complexa

reaction coordinate. A harmonic potential U(Оҫ) = 2Оҫ (Оҫ0 вҲ’ Оҫi)2 was applied, with the force constant kОҫ ranging from 4 to 6 kcal/ molВ·Г…2. The reference distance Оҫ0 was modified in each US window. In addition to the distance restraint along the reaction coordinate 5 angular restraints (2 axial restraints and 3 orientational restraints) were applied according to a harmonic potential U(Оұ) = 2Оұ (Оұ0 вҲ’ Оұi)2 with a force constant of kОұ = 10 kcal/molВ·rad2. The angular restraints were based on 3 additional centers-of-masses of subsets of 20 atoms in each partner protein. The separation of the new COMs was taken as large as possible. Taking the angles between three or four points the axial or orientational restraints were defined (see Supporting Information Figure S1). We gained the reference positions Оұ0 by evaluating the starting structures. To allow limited backbone and full side chain flexibility of partner proteins the same

PDB

no. of windows

simulation time (days)

separation (Г…)

force constant (kcal/mol В· Г…2)

7cei 1ak4 1ay7 1ppe 1r0r 1i25 1j2j 1z0k 1qa9 1gcq 2oob 1ffw 1zhi 3a4s 1fle 2sni 3sgq 1syx 2cfh 1z5y

4.1 6.1 3.1 3.8 5.7 5.8 5.3 3.4 3.0 1.5 0.6 6.0 6.9 7.6 7.4 7.3 3.2 4.0 6.8 6.7

0.30 0.30 0.25 0.40 0.30 0.30 0.25 0.30 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.15 0.30 0.15 0.30 0.30 0.30 0.25 0.30 0.30

5.0 5.0 6.0 4.0 5.0 5.0 6.0 5.0 5.0 4.0 4.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 6.0 6.0 5.0 5.0

Each complex is indicated by PDB id. The number of windows corresponds to the number of separate umbrella sampling simulations. The distance between each US interval, force constant for the quadratic distance restraint, and total simulation time on a single GPU (for 50 complexes) are also indicated.

change) along the COM distance (PMFs) were evaluated using the WHAM algorithm.51 Due to the small US windows, the conformational, axial, and orientational restraints and the use of an implicit solvent reasonable convergence could be achieved with a simulation length of 1 ns per window (Supporting Information Figures S3вҲ’S5) Additionally, in order to obtain the absolute binding free energy, three free simulations of the complex, the ligand, and the receptor were performed for 4 ns with no restraints applied. As starting structure the umbrella sampling window was used that

[Page 4]

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Realistic ranking of predicted proteinвҲ’protein complex structures is one of the key challenges in the field of proteinвҲ’ protein docking and decisive for using such techniques in any useful application. Thus far, ranking of complexes is typically based on scoring functions based on force field- or knowledgebased evaluation of single-complex structures or on mean interactions energies between partners. However, proteinвҲ’ protein binding is determined by the associated free energy change that includes solvent effects and entropic as well as energetic contributions. Hence, the binding free energy associated with complex formation can be considered as the ideal ranking score for evaluating docked complexes. The aim of our study is to evaluate the possibility to use a calculated binding free energy obtained from restraint US simulations as docking scoring function and to compare it with a score based on singlepoint energy minimization and after a short MD-based refinement (Figure 1). Preferably, one would use an explicit

corresponded to the minimum position of the PMF. The equilibrium binding constant can be calculated from the work of bringing the binding partner from the bulk to the native binding state (see details in Supporting Information)39 Keq = 4ПҖ В·Оҫbulk В·

вҲ«site dОҫeвҲ’ОІ(A(Оҫ)вҲ’A(Оҫ )) bulk

(1)

The integration is performed over the phase space region representing the bound state. Оҫbulk indicates a distance in the bulk region where ligand and receptor are not bound. Furthermore, the standard binding free energy can be expressed as follows38,39 О”G bind = вҲ’kBT ln(KeqC в—Ұ)

(2)

with the standard concentration CВ° = 1/1661 Г…3. The incorporation of this concentration is crucial in order to compare the free energy values to experimental results. The advantage of this method is that the whole dissociation/ association process is considered. Hence, also entropic effects are included and the whole free energy profile of binding is obtained. A typical PMF A(Оҫ) has the following characteristics: It lowers with increasing COM distance of the CОұ atoms between ligand and receptor (x axis) until the optimum distance is reached at the minimum PMF. After that the PMF increases until the ligand and the receptor cease to influence each other and the PMF reaches a plateau (bulk region). The region representing the bound state was defined as the states around the minimum position where the PMF does not exceed 2 kcal/mol. Note that the definition of the binding site is not prone to errors, as high PMF values are exponentially suppressed. Hence, by considering a much larger bound region, deviations of less than 0.01 kcal/mol were observed for the calculated free energy. Thus, for PMFs where the bulk state was below 2 kcal/mol, the barrier height was diminished to approximately 1 kcal/mol. Like this we were able to obtain reasonable results also for models with a low affinity. Nevertheless, nearly all cases included some decoy complexes that were so weakly bound that no proper PMF was obtained, and thus, no free energy of binding could be calculated. In particular, for the protein 1qa9 only 21 models could be resolved followed by 3a4s with 38 results. As we are primarily interested in the ranking of the complexes with high affinity, the lack of on average 4 weakly bound decoy models does not deteriorate the results. Additionally, the RMSD from the native structure was recalculated by evaluating the deviation at the minimum position of the PMF. Moreover, the uncertainties of the RMSD (standard deviation of the mean RMSD at the minimum PMF) and the free energy of binding (mean of the standard deviation was Вұ1.0 kcal/mol) are presented. In this context, the simulations were split into 6 parts, where each one was treated separately, and the mean free energy of binding with its standard deviation was calculated. The mean difference in О”G between evaluating the parts of the simulations and evaluating the whole trajectory is 0.03 kcal/ mol. It lies at least 1 order of magnitude under the range of the uncertainty and is clearly smaller than the scale in which changes in the specificity occur. Compared to the MD refinement the US simulations were much more expensive and took 5.0 days on average for all decoy complexes for one proteinвҲ’protein complex (see Table 2) using one GeForce GTX 1080 or GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU card.

Figure 1. Different scoring methods that are used in this study. Binding energy was calculated after energy minimization (EM) and MD-based refinement. Restraint umbrella sampling (US) yields the binding free energy, and absolute binding free energy was accessed by accounting for the restraints via the Woo and Roux scheme.39

solvent representation, but due to the many water molecules (large box sizes are necessary for allowing to separate the protein partners to an appropriate unbound distance) such approach is computationally too demanding for application to many decoy complexes of a given proteinвҲ’protein complex system. In addition, since it is possible to use a reduced effective viscosity in the implicit solvent case (see Materials and Methods) faster convergence of translational and rotational (diffusive) sampling of the partners is possible. The use of an implicit solvent has the additional advantage that the same force field and implicit solvent model is employed for scoring based just on energy minimization or following short MD-based refinement or USbased free energy calculation. Initial systematic docking on 20 benchmark test cases with unbound partner structures using ATTRACT18,20,48 resulted in 50 docked decoy complexes with an RMSD less than 15 Г… from the native geometry (see Table 2). The scoring based on the ATTRACT force field is indicated in the Supporting Information (Figure S8). The RMSD indicates the root-mean-square deviation of the complex relative to the native structure after best superposition onto the native complex. The docking result corresponds to a frequently encountered prediction case in which the approximate binding regions on partner molecules are known and only a limited set of solutions need to be considered.

[Page 5]

Figure 2. Force field scoring after energy minimization of all 50 decoy proteinвҲ’protein complexes for each test case (indicated as PDB id). Calculated interaction energy (green circles) between both protein partners is plotted vs the RMSD from the native complex. Green squares display the unbound partners after superposition on the bound native complex and subsequent energy minimization (best possible placement for unbound rigid docking), and magenta square depicts the interaction energy of the native bound complex (after energy minimization).

For a first docking evaluation we use the same force field model as used in the US simulations based on the Amber ff14SB50 in combination with an advanced GB model specifically designed for proteins52,53 (igb = 8 option in Amber) after extensive energy minimization of each docking solution (Figure 2). The binding interaction energy О”EBind was calculated

according to eq 3 by subtracting the complex energy from the sum of the corresponding ligand and receptor energies О”E Bind = О”ECoul + О”E LJ + О”GSolv

(3)

with contributions due to Coulomb interaction (О”ECoul), LennardвҲ’Jones interaction (О”ELJ), and difference in solvation

[Page 6]

Figure 3. Force field scoring after molecular dynamics refinement of all 50 decoy proteinвҲ’protein complexes for each test case (indicated as PDB id). Calculated proteinвҲ’protein interaction energy (blue circles) is plotted vs the RMSD from the native complex. Interaction energy after refinement of the unbound complexes is indicated as green squares. Magenta squares depict the interaction energy of the native bound complex (after refinement).

Docking models with a very small RMSD of around 1 Г… from the native complex,were obtained for the structures 3sgq, 1gcq, 2oob, 1qa9, 1ay7, 2sni, and 1r0r. In the case of 1j2j and 3a4s the predicted structures closest to the native show an RMSD of 2вҲ’3 Г…. While in most cases the RMSD was relatively evenly distributed in the range from 1 to 12 Г…, for the complex 1qa9 only solutions with RMSD lower than 3 Г… or higher than 9 Г… were obtained. The calculated scoring interaction energy of the best scored models was highest for the structures 7cei (вҲ’78 kcal/mol), 2sni (вҲ’52 kcal/mol), and 3sgq (вҲ’45 kcal/mol). The

free energy (О”GSolv). The last term consists of a polar component (О”GGB) and a nonpolar surface tension component that is proportional to the loss of solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) upon complex formation. However, it turns out that the SASA surface tension contribution differed very little between the sampled conformations in the bound complexes (in comparison to the other interaction energy contributions), and therefore, it was only calculated for the final structures and not included during energy minimization or MD simulations.

[Page 7]

Figure 4. RMSD of all refined complexes from the native complex vs the initial RMSD after the proteinвҲ’protein docking. Red circles (522) mark models, where the RMSD decreased upon refinement, and blue circles (459) identify models for which the RMSD increased after the refinement.

lowest scoring value of around вҲ’15 kcal/mol was obtained for complex 1ay7 followed by вҲ’19 kcal/mol for 1z5y. Evaluation of the bound complex structure with the same energy minimization and force field protocol resulted in a best score for the bound complex in all test cases (Figure 2) supporting the quality of the continuum solvent force field score. In the case of the native complex with unbound partners (by fitting the CОұ atoms of the partners to the native complex, corresponding to the best possible rigid docking solution for unbound docking) the resulting complex often scored considerably worse than the bound solution and other solutions obtained from the systematic search (Figure 2). In contrast, the RMSD of the energy-minimized unbound form relative to the native complex was around 1 Г… for nearly all cases. Only in the cases of 7cei, 1syx, and 2cfh the deviations were higher, up to 2 Г…. These can be due to variations of the backbone orientation (7cei) or a conformational twist that involves whole Оұ-helices (2cfh). The unfavorable scoring of the energy-minimized unbound complex (in near-native starting geometry) observed for several cases is likely due to trapping of incorrect side chain and possibly backbone states at the proteinвҲ’protein interface compared to the bound docking case. For four structures docking models were found that had nearly the same RMSD as the unbound form (3sgq, 1gcq, 1r0r, and 2cfh). The correlation of binding energy to RMSD value was reasonable for 1syx, 3sgq, 7cei, 2cfh, and 2sni. Here, models with a small deviation to the native complex were scored more favorable compared to high RMSD solutions. Nevertheless, for most proteins, the docking run produced several solutions with high RMSD that scored well (1ffw, 1qa9, 3a4s, 1ay7, 1gcq, 1ppe, 2oob, 1r0r, 1fle, 1z5y, and 2i25). For some structures, e.g., 3a4s, 1j2j, 1ak4, 1r0r, and 1qa9, low RMSD solutions with predicted high affinity were found but at the same time also models with a similar RMSD but calculated low score. The atomistic scoring function with implicit GB solvent model identifies the bound complex in most but not all cases as the best scoring solution. In some cases solutions very close to the bound complex can significantly vary in scoring because of side chain or small backbone differences at the interface region. Hence, an MD-based refinement might be necessary to improve the specificity of the scoring.

Molecular Dynamics Refinement of Docked Complexes. A standard MD-based refinement procedure was applied to all energy-minimized complexes following closely a standard procedure that is used as the final refinement step in the ATTRACT docking protocol.28 It consists of a short MD simulation including restraints to keep the backbone structure of each partner reasonably close to the start conformation but allowing full side chain flexibility and some adjustment of relative partner translation and orientation followed by a final energy minimization (see Materials and Methods section for details). During the refinement the same force field was used as in the energy minimization (EM) protocol. It is important to emphasize the MD refinement is not intended to serve as a new search procedure to identify new relevant docking geometries (this is done by the initial systematic docking run, see above). The purpose of the short MD refinement is to more effectively reach a nearby local minimum (compared to just energy minimization). It relates to procedures widely used in the proteinвҲ’protein docking field to rapidly locally optimize thousands of docking solutions obtained from a systematic docking run using various docking methods (e.g., FFT-dock,31 ATTRACT,28 HADDOCK54). On average the refinement procedure resulted in better agreement of predicted complexes compared to the native complex for many cases (Figure 3). The lowest sampled RMSD decreased for 14 out of the 20 structures after the refinement. In particular, for cases with an initial RMSD of less than 5 Г… frequently further improvement was observed. The largest impact was found for 1j2j, where the RMSD improved by 1.7 Г…. The calculated interaction energies are lower for all complexes compared to the start structures. The improvement ranged from 9 kcal/mol (1zhi) to 40 kcal/mol (1ay7) for the best-scored model. In addition, the scoring of native-like complexes with unbound partner structures improved in most cases with a reduced deviation from the scoring of the bound complex indicating sterical adjustments at the partner interface. For 13 cases (1z0k, 1j2j, 2sni, 3sgq, 1zhi, 7cei, 1gcq, 1ay7, 1ppe, 1r0r, 2oob, 1syx, and 1qa9) a favorable scoring of low RMSD solutions was observed, Figure 4. Moreover, compared to the EM of docked complexes for 9 cases an improved ranking of structures close to the native complex compared to high RMSD solutions was found (1ay7,

[Page 8]

Figure 5. Superposition of the decoy complex (ligand protein in red cartoon, receptor as blue surface representation) of the PDB 2i25 case with the smallest deviation from the native complex (ligand protein as green cartoon). Loop of the native bound ligand conformation at the interface (green cartoon) fits well into a receptor pocket, whereas loop of the decoy complex (partners in unbound conformation) deviates significantly from the placement in the native interface.

1ffw, 1qa9, 1ppe, 2oob, 2sni, 1zhi, 1r0r, and 2i25). The scoring got worse compared to EM for 11 docked complexes. However, only in the case of 1ak4 the funnel plot changed from a higher specificity to a lower specificity after MD refinement, while the specificity improved for four structures (1ay7, 1ppe, 1zhi, and 1r0r). Overall, the refinement step enhanced the quality of the results. In many cases the shape of the resulting funnel plots improved. Further refinement runs under different temperature conditions (100, 200, and 300 K) as well as longer simulation times were tested but did not improve the relative scoring (not shown). A final re-evaluation after the refinement results with a more sophisticated implicit solvent treatment using both a R-6 integration scheme introduced by Aguilar et al.55 or solving the linearized finite-difference PoissonвҲ’Boltzmann (FDPB) equation instead of a GB model also did not give noticeably improved scoring specificity (Supporting Information Figures S6 and S7). Binding Free Energy Calculation Using Umbrella Sampling. The present force field scoring based on energy minimization or after MD-based refinement identified in several cases complex structures close to the native geometry as complexes with lowest interaction energy. However, still for several cases non-native complex geometries achieved better scores than the native structures, and even in successful cases the separation between the best scoring near-native solutions and several incorrect complexes was small relative to the range of scores. In order to obtain a more realistic free energy-based scoring we sample the binding dissociation/association process along a center-of-mass (COM) distance coordinate using umbrella sampling (US). Such simulations are performed by applying a

set of harmonic potentials that restrain the relative position of the partners to an interval along a distance reaction coordinate in several simulations. The potential of mean force (PMF) is then calculated by evaluating the distance histograms of the simulations by employing the WHAM algorithm51 (see Materials and Methods section for details). In order to achieve rapid convergence both the conformational flexibility and the relative rotational degrees of freedom of the protein partners were restricted (three torsional angles between receptor and ligand, Оұ, ПҮ, and Оі, and two axial angles, Оё and ПҶ, see Supporting Information Figure S1). The use of a continuum solvent model combined with the conformational and orientational restraints resulted in reasonable convergence of the calculated PMFs within 1 ns sampling per US window (using 20вҲ’55 US windows, see Supporting Information Figures S3,S4). The orientational and conformational restraining contributions can be calculated separately at the two end points of the US simulations (bound state vs bulk state) as described in the Materials and Methods section (see also Supporting Information). However, in a first attempt we compare the calculated free energies without accounting for the orientational and conformational restraining contributions (Figure 6), hence assuming that the calculated PMFs dominate the binding free energy. The calculated PMF binding free energy ranges from вҲ’6 Вұ 1 (3a4s) to вҲ’23 Вұ 1 kcal/mol (2sni) for the best bound model, much more positive than the interaction energies obtained with the same force field before or after refinement (see above). Encouragingly, the range of calculated free energies is similar to experimental binding free energies of proteinвҲ’protein complexes13,56 (see also next section). Using the native bound complex as the starting structure resulted in the most favorable

[Page 9]

Figure 6. Scoring of decoy complexes based on the potential-of-mean force free energy obtained from restrained umbrella sampling simulations vs deviation from the native complex geometry. Green squares display the results for starting from the native complex but using unbound partner structures, whereas magenta squares depict results obtained starting from the native bound complex.

calculated PMF for 5 complexes, and in 12 cases the bound structure ranks among the best ranked complexes. Thus, only for 3 proteins (3a4s, 2oob, and 1j2j) it failed to score the native binding mode among the top-ranked complexes. The difference in the calculated binding PMF of unbound to bound form was high (above 10 kcal/mol) for complexes 1fle, 2sni, and 2i25, indicating that differences in backbone and side chain conformations still exist and shift the results to lower calculated binding PMFs for the unbound complex. Nevertheless, in many

cases other models close to the native complex scored very favorably. The selectivity of the funnel plot (for the definiton of selectivity see the paragraph on selectivity) was favorable for 16 structures (1z0k, 7cei, 1ffw, 1syx, 1qa9, 1j2j, 3sgq, 1gcq, 1ppe, 2cfh, 1ak4, 2sni, 1zhi, 1r0r, 1z5y, and 2i25) with a clear preference of the models having a low RMSD. In addition, an unfavorable selectivity was obtained for four models. Here, the highest scored pose at the binding site has a lower ranking than

[Page 10]

Figure 7. Same as Figure 6 but plotting the calculated absolute binding free energies vs deviation from the native complex. Green squares display the results for starting from the native complex but using unbound partner structures, whereas magenta squares depict results obtained starting from the native bound complex.

conformation but not in the unbound conformation. Switching of the loop during the simulations toward the bound form is not observed during the US simulations (presumably because of the RMSD constraints to limit the conformational flexibility during the US simulations). Compared to the single-point scoring after refinement a clear improvement of the results could be achieved for 15 of the 20 structures (1z0k, 3a4s, 7cei, 1ffw, 1syx, 1qa9, 3sgq, 1gcq, 1ppe, 2cfh, 1ak4, 2sni, 1zhi, 1z5y, and 2i25). Most importantly, in six cases a low selectivity during refinement changed to a high

the highest scored pose not at the binding site (2oob, 1ay7, 3a4s, and 1fle). Interestingly, for two cases a large gap between the calculated binding free energy in the case of starting from the bound complex vs any other decoy including the unbound complex was found (1fle and 2i25). Inspection of these cases identified indeed an unfavorable unbound backbone conformation at the interface that interferes with the correct interface structure (see Figure 5). For example, the protein 2i25 has a loop at the interface that directs toward the receptor in the native bound

[Page 11]

Figure 8. Contributions of individual free energy terms (from the absolute binding free energy calculations) to the mean scoring, scoring of the nearnative or scoring of the most favorable non-native decoy.

corresponding free energy contributions (see Materials and Methods and Supporting Information). The conformational restraining contribution can also be estimated through an additional simulation of the individual ligand and receptor proteins without restraining potentials and using FEP to estimate the associated free energy contribution. The orientational and axial bulk (unbound) contributions can be calculated without additional simulations (see Supporting Information for a more detailed description). Finally, since we are now interested in absolute binding free energies the nonpolar solvation contributions were accounted for by adding a cavity solvent tension term, calculated from the buried SASA, to the binding free energy. In Figure 7, the funnel plots (absolute binding free energy vs RMSD from the native complex) are shown for the 20 proteins. Accounting for the additional contributions resulted in less favorable binding free energies for all complexes (mean difference 5 kcal/mol), so that for most of the decoys (55%) the associated binding free energy is positive, predicting unfavorable binding. Hence, in contrast to the simple scoring schemes described above the absolute binding free energy calculations predict that the majority of decoy complexes do not form at all. However, the binding free energy was still attractive for the best scored model of all structures and for all cases when using the bound partner conformations in the starting complex except for three cases: 1ffw, 2oob, and 3a4s (Figure 7).

selectivity (1ffw, 2cfh, 1ak4, 1z5y, and 2i25) after the restraint US simulations. The ranking of the models did not change considerably for five structures (3sgq, 7cei, 1fle, 1syx, and 1qa9). Importantly, the employment of restraint umbrella sampling did only yield two funnel plots that were considered as less selective than after the simple refinement (1ay7 and 2oob). Absolute Binding Free Energy Calculation. In the previous section the ranking of decoy complexes was based on free energies calculated including restraints on orientation and conformation of the binding partners (PMF obtained along the reaction coordinate). It is possible to account for the axial, orientational (orient), and conformational (conf) contributions following an approach introduced by Woo and Roux39 that yields the absolute binding free energy (details are given in the Materials and Methods section and Supporting Information) О”G bind= bulk bulk site site site restr,axial в—Ұ вҲ’ОІ[О”G bind + (О”Gorient +О”Gconf ) вҲ’ (О”Gorient +О”Gaxial +О”Gconf )]

вҲ’ kBT ln[C e

]

О”GAbsolute = О”G bind + О”GSASA

In the case of the bound state calculation of the conformational and axial and orientational site (bound) terms requires additional simulations of the complex (starting from the window of the minimum PMF) without applying restraints. On the basis of free energy perturbation (FEP) it is possible to evaluate the

[Page 12]

Figure 9. Mean selectivity of all structures and selectivity of each structure for the different scoring methods. Selectivity was calculated as described in the main text (see eq 5), considering the highest ranked poses at the binding site and not at the binding site.

Apart from the PMF contribution, the term that varied the most between the different systems was the conformational bulk contribution (the orientational and axial contributions did not vary strongly between the systems due to the relatively small force constants). The shift toward more unfavorable binding affinity was generally due to a higher bulk contribution of axial, orientational, and conformational restraints in comparison to the same terms for the associated state (see Figure 8). It reflects a free energy cost related to a loss of freedom due to a restricted axial, orientational, and conformational mobility in the associated state. For loosely bound complexes the free energy cost due to restriction of axial, orientational, and conformational mobility is expected to be smaller than for binding to the highaffinity sites, and indeed, considering absolute binding free energy gives a ranking that favors the near-native complexes less than the binding free energy based only on the PMF calculation (previous paragraph). Thus, the preference improved compared to the US evaluation for 8 structures (3a4s, 7cei, 1ay7, 1j2j, 3sgq, 2cfh, 1r0r, and 1fle) and deteriorated for 12 structures (1z0k, 1ffw, 1syx, 1qa9, 1gcq, 1ppe, 2oob, 1ak4, 2sni, 1zhi, 1z5y, and 2i25). Overall, the selectivity changed from a high preference to a low preference for three structures (1ffw, 1ak4, and 2i25) and vice versa for one structure (3a4s). Thus, also for the proteins where a change in the specificity was observed, this was mainly due to an alteration in the relative scoring of only a few models. Evaluation of the Binding Selectivity of the Scoring Methods. In order to be able to compare the different scoring methods a measurement for selectivity has to be defined, reflecting how well the poses at the binding site score compared to all other decoys. The overall shapes of the funnel plots of each

structure are pretty similar (besides a shift in the scoring axis) for the different scoring methods; its the scoring of just a few poses per structure that leads to high differences in the selectivity. Thus, it is possible to scale the different scorings to relative values and consequently be able to compare the selectivity by identifying the key poses. First, comparable scores were obtained by shifting each score Si by the mean value of all scores SМ… and dividing it by the minimum scoring value Smin SiвҖІ =

Si вҲ’ S М… Smin

(4)

Second, a decoy was defined as being at the binding site if its RMSD was smaller than Rmin + 1.5 Г…, with Rmin being the smallest RMSD value of all poses. The pose with the highest score (minimum binding energy) while being at the binding site is called the true (T) result. The highest ranked pose that is not at the binding site is called the false (F) result. The selectivity is measured by taking the difference of these key poses Selectivity = STвҖІ вҲ’ SFвҖІ

(5)

The selectivity lies between 1.0 and вҲ’1.0 (as ST, SF < SМ… for all structures and scoring methods). A value of 1.0 indicates a perfectly selective scoring; the best scored pose at the binding site is separated clearly from the other poses. On the other hand, a value of вҲ’1.0 indicates that there is a high selectivity for the poses not being at the binding site. Finally, a selectivity of 0 means that the scoring of false and true decoys was the same. Note that due to the definition of the origin of the scaled scores as the mean scoring value (in contrast to, e.g., the mean scoring

[Page 13]

Figure 10. Binding affinity of the best scored pose at the binding site (defined as in the selectivity paragraph) for the different scoring methods. Values for all structures are shown and can be compared to the experimental binding affinities (orange bars) which were available for 16 structures.

value minus one standard deviation), the selectivity values are only in a few cases higher than 0.5, although the selectivity is good regarding the funnel plots (e.g., 1z0k, 1ppe, 1ffw with US). Thus, the defined selectivity should be considered as a relative value to compare the different scoring approaches, not as an absolute value for the selectivity of individual funnel plots (as this value highly depends on the defined origin of the scaled scores). In Figure 9 the calculated selectivity is shown for all structures and all scoring approaches. The scoring with EM had the highest selectivity for two structures (7cei and 1ak4); single-point scoring after MD refinement had the highest selectivity for three structures (1ay7, 2oob, and 1r0r), the US approach was the most selective for 10 structures (1z0k, 1ffw, 1syx, 1qa9, 1gcq, 1ppe, 2sni, 1zhi, 1z5y, and 2i25), and the absolute binding free energy calculation had the highest selectivity for 5 structures (3a4s, 1j2j, 3sgq, 2cfh, 1fle). Considering the mean selectivity for all structures US performed best with a value of 0.33; second highest was the absolute binding free energy calculation (selectivity = 0.28). Less selective were the single-point scoring after refinement (0.14) and single-point scoring of the docked and minimized poses (0.06). This reflects a clear improvement in the overall selectivity using the more sophisticated scoring methods in contrast to single-point scoring. Comparison of the Scores with Experimental Binding Free Energies. For 16 evaluated structures, experimental binding free energies are available (Supporting Information Table S1). These values have to be regarded with caution as not all results were obtained by the same experimental approach. It has been found that experimental binding affinities of proteinвҲ’

protein complexes can depend significantly on the experimental method.13,56 For comparison with experiment the best scoring complex among the ensemble of native-like complexes (see above) was considered. Interestingly, the restraint US approach (just considering the PMF along the dissociation/association coordinate) showed the best agreement with the experimental data, followed by the absolute binding free energy calculation. Both methods performed remarkably better than simple singlepoint scoring due to a shift toward higher absolute free energy values (see Figure 10). Hence, for 50% of the structures the binding free energies calculated from the PMF only were within a range of Вұ2 kcal/mol of the experimental binding affinities (7cei, 1ppe, 1z0k, 1qa9, 1ak4, 2oob, 1ffw, 3a4s), and a small mean deviation of О”О”GMean = О”Gexp вҲ’ О”Gcalc = 0.4 kcal/mol was observed. The highest scored pose at the binding site was considered for each structure, as described in the last paragraph. Accounting for the restraining contributions 25% of the structures had a scoring in very good agreement (Вұ2 kcal/ mol) with the experimental values (1r0r, 1j2j, 1z0k, and 1gcq) with a mean deviation of вҲ’3.8 kcal/mol. In the case of the singlepoint scoring, after the EM evaluation two structures (13%) scored close to the experimental values (2i25 and 1ay7). Note that these two structures had a negative selectivity (see Figure 9), meaning that the pose at the binding site that was considered for the evaluation was not the overall best scored pose. With MD refinement no structure had a pose at the binding site with a scoring value in agreement with the experimental binding affinity. In both cases the shift in the scoring toward too high energy values is pointed out by a mean deviation of 19.8 and 47.1 kcal/mol to the experimental binding free energies.

[Page 14]

failed to predict the native binding site. For 2 proteins a substantial difference in scoring of the bound and the unbound native conformation was observed. In these cases conformational changes at the binding site, leading to a high affinity of the complex, were not captured (due to conformational restraints during the simulations). Nevertheless, for all other complexes the near-native models showed a high ranking. Interestingly, the selectivity did not change significantly upon calculation of the absolute binding free energy, indicating that the individual restraining contributions play a smaller role (and may compensate each other in part) compared to the effective receptorвҲ’ligand interactions captured through the US calculations along the distance coordinate. Furthermore, we found a significant correlation to experimental results of 0.73 and 0.74 for the restraint US free energy values and the absolute binding free energy, respectively. The MD refinement gave an even higher correlation of 0.85, due to the fact that for overall higher scorings the PCC is less prone to deviations of some kcal/mol in the interaction energy. In particular, the calculated PCCs were higher than the correlation of all scoring methods evaluated by Kastritis and Bonvin,13 yielding a maximum correlation coefficient of вҲ’0.32 but on a larger benchmark set of 81 complexes. A better correlation was achieved recently by Chen and co-workers that investigated the performance of MM/PBSA and MM/GBSA methods on 46 proteins of the same proteinвҲ’protein benchmark as in our study.35 They achieved a maximum correlation of 0.647 using MM/GBSA, a low interior dielectric (Оө = 1), and the force field ff02. Interestingly, when testing the same force field that was used in our study, ff14SB, a worse correlation of 0.578 was achieved. The inclusion of explicit solvent represents an obvious possible improvement of the present approach. However, although in principle it is more accurate than an implicit solvent model, it is significantly more demanding, especially for small systems, and requires longer simulation times for convergence. Nevertheless, in cases were the number of decoy complexes is even smaller than the 50 complexes considered in the present study inclusion of explicit solvent may represent a realistic option. Another limitation of the present approach is the conformational restraints employed to achieve rapid convergence. Although allowing also limited deformations of the backbone such restraints may prevent a transition to a nearnative bound partner structure especially if the conformational difference between unbound and bound conformations is significant. In future studies we plan to test if an optimization of the conformational restraints employed during the US simulations can further improve the results. Second, employment of advanced sampling methods like replica exchange umbrella sampling (REUS or HREUS) along the distance coordinate57,58 can also further improve the results.

In the case of just limiting the analysis to the scoring of the native (bound) poses a slightly lower agreement to the experiment was obtained: 39% of the structures were in close agreement for the US evaluation (1ppe, 1j2j, 1z0k, 1qa9, 1ak4, 2oob, and 1ffw) and 13% for the absolute binding free energy calculation (1qa9 and 2i25). For the single-point interaction energy evaluations the native models were never in close agreement with the experimental binding free energies. In addition, we also calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) between the highest scored binding affinity at the binding site and the experimental data. Note that a coefficient of 1 represents a perfectly correlated system and 0 a completely uncorrelated state. This yielded significant correlations of 0.73 and 0.74 for the PMF-based approach and the absolute binding free energy calculation, respectively. Thus, we find no difference between these methods if the PCC is considered, which is in accordance with the finding of the previous section that calculating the absolute binding free energy has only a minor influence on the selectivity. The highest PCC of 0.85 was found for the MD refinement; the scoring with EM had the lowest value of 0.60. The results have to be regarded with caution, as we are dealing with a limited data size that incorporates much more low-energy binder than high-energy binder; the latter consequently have a much higher impact on the correlation coefficient. Moreover, calculating the correlation coefficient omits the fact that the US calculations have to be much more precise than the single-point scoring values in order to achieve the same correlation coefficient, due to the much higher absolute scorings of the single-point evaluation.

CONCLUSIONS A long-term goal of our efforts is to design a scoring approach that is reliable enough to realistically predict the binding free energy of complexes and so accurate that new interactions between proteins (not those already discovered experimentally) can be reliably predicted. In the present study, the possibility of evaluating docked proteinвҲ’protein complexes using US-based free energy simulations was explored. The results were compared to scoring using the same force field approach but evaluating the interaction energy of energy-minimized or MDrefined complexes. In the present study we used the ATTRACT docking program18,20 for generating putative docked complexes (typically generating hundred thousands of solutions within an hours computer time). However, this step can also be replaced by other search techniques to obtain putative proteinвҲ’protein binding geometries. In terms of selectivity the free energy simulation approach resulted in improved scoring compared to the simpler approaches based on the interaction energy of single complexes. Encouragingly, the calculated binding free energies are in quite reasonable agreement with experimental data. Remaining differences might be due to inaccuracies of the force field and implicit solvent model but can also be in part due to the experimental methods used for affinity measurements.13 In most proteinвҲ’protein docking tasks one ends up with a limited number of possible complex geometries (e.g., often experimental data may limit the regions of interaction on partner proteins). In such cases the present binding free energy simulation approach might be very useful to further limit the number of putative complexes or to even reliably identify the most realistic complex structure. Interestingly, scoring based just on the restraint US approach resulted in the most precise results with a high selectivity found for 16 complexes and only in 4 cases

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

S Supporting Information *

The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.jctc.8b01022. Detailed information on the absolute binding free energy calculations; convergence of the calculated free energies and comparison to experimental binding data; three orientational and two axial restraint angles were defined as shown using three COM positions on each partner protein; thermodynamic circle illustrating the different

[Page 15]

(10) Vajda, S.; Hall, D. R.; Kozakov, D. Sampling and scoring: A marriage made in heaven. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2013, 81, 1874вҲ’1884. (11) Li, L.; Guo, D.; Huang, Y.; Liu, S.; Xiao, Y. ASPDock: proteinprotein docking algorithm using atomic solvation parameters model. BMC Bioinf. 2011, 12, 36. (12) Zheng, Z.; Merz, K. M., Jr Development of the knowledge-based and empirical combined scoring algorithm (kecsa) to score proteinвҲ’ ligand interactions. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2013, 53, 1073вҲ’1083. (13) Kastritis, P. L.; Bonvin, A. M. Are scoring functions in proteinprotein docking ready to predict interactomes? Clues from a novel binding affinity benchmark. J. Proteome Res. 2010, 9, 2216вҲ’2225. (14) Kuroda, D.; Gray, J. J. Pushing the backbone in protein-protein docking. Structure 2016, 24, 1821вҲ’1829. (15) Totrov, M.; Abagyan, R. Flexible ligand docking to multiple receptor conformations: a practical alternative. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2008, 18, 178вҲ’184. (16) FernГЎndez-Recio, J.; Totrov, M.; Abagyan, R. ICM-DISCO docking by global energy optimization with fully flexible side-chains. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2003, 52, 113вҲ’117. (17) Luitz, M. P.; Zacharias, M. Protein-ligand docking using Hamiltonian Replica Exchange simulations with soft core potentials. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2014, 54, 1669вҲ’1675. (18) Zacharias, M. ProteinвҲ’protein docking with a reduced protein model accounting for side-chain flexibility. Protein Sci. 2003, 12, 1271вҲ’ (19) Zacharias, M. ATTRACT: proteinвҲ’protein docking in CAPRI using a reduced protein model. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2005, 60, 252вҲ’256. (20) de Vries, S.; Zacharias, M. Flexible docking and refinement with a coarse-grained protein model using ATTRACT. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2013, 81, 2167вҲ’2174. (21) Chaudhury, S.; Berrondo, M.; Weitzner, B. D.; Muthu, P.; Bergman, H.; Gray, J. J. Benchmarking and Analysis of Protein Docking Performance in Rosetta v3.2. PLoS One 2011, 6, No. e22477. (22) May, A.; Zacharias, M. Protein-ligand docking accounting for receptor side chain and global flexibility in normal modes: evaluation on kinase inhibitor cross docking. J. Med. Chem. 2008, 51, 3499вҲ’3506. (23) May, A.; Zacharias, M. Accounting for global protein deformability during proteinвҲ’ protein and proteinвҲ’ligand docking. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Proteins Proteomics 2005, 1754, 225вҲ’231. (24) May, A.; Zacharias, M. Energy minimization in low-frequency normal modes to efficiently allow for global flexibility during systematic proteinвҲ’protein docking. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2008, 70, 794вҲ’ (25) Moal, I. H.; Bates, P. A. SwarmDock and the use of normal modes in protein-protein docking. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2010, 11, 3623вҲ’3648. (26) de Vries, S. J.; van Dijk, A. D. J.; Krzeminski, M.; van Dijk, M.; Thureau, A.; Hsu, V.; Wassenaar, T.; Bonvin, A. M. J. J. HADDOCK versus HADDOCK: New features and performance of HADDOCK2.0 on the CAPRI targets. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2007, 69, 726вҲ’ (27) Mashiach, E.; Nussinov, R.; Wolfson, H. J. FiberDock: Flexible induced-fit backbone refinement in molecular docking. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2010, 78, 1503вҲ’1519. (28) Schindler, C. E.; de Vries, S. J.; Zacharias, M. iATTRACT: Simultaneous global and local interface optimization for proteinвҲ’ protein docking refinement. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2015, 83, 248вҲ’258. (29) Venkatraman, V.; Ritchie, D. W. Flexible protein docking refinement using posedependent normal mode analysis. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2012, 80, 2262вҲ’2274. (30) de Vries, S.; Zacharias, M. Flexible docking and refinement with a coarse-grained protein model using ATTRACT. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2013, 81, 2167вҲ’2174. (31) KrГіl, M.; Tournier, A. L.; Bates, P. A. Flexible relaxation of rigidbody docking solutions. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2007, 68, 159вҲ’

free energy contributions gained with FEP, the distance PMF, and integration over the Euler angles; typical distance probability histograms of the US windows indicating sufficient overlap for accurate free energy estimation; PMFs associated with the distance histograms of Figure S3; PMF free energy for each decoy was calculated after 1/6, 2/6, etc., of the total simulation time and subtracted from the calculated free energy obtained after the total simulation time for each US interval; rescoring after MD refinement/energy minimization and subsequent recalculation of the polar solvation free energy by solving the linearized finite-difference Poisson Boltzmann equation; same as Figure S3 after rescoring of the MD refinement results using a RвҲ’6 integration scheme for calculating effective Born radii in the generalized Born model to estimate the polar solvation free energy; original Attract docking score of the 50 models closest to the native complex used in the present study for each of the 20 proteinвҲ’protein complexes; table of the experimental binding affinity О”GExp and binding affinity of the best scored model at the binding site evaluated with US О”GUS and the absolute binding free energy О”GAbsolute for all structures; additional references (PDF)

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

*E-mail: zacharias@tum.de. ORCID

Martin Zacharias: 0000-0001-5163-2663 Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the DFG (German Research Foundation) grant SFB (Collaborative Research Center) 1035 (project B02) for financial support. Computer resources for this project have been provided by the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing/ Leibniz Supercomputing Centre under grant pr27za.

REFERENCES

(1) Huang, S.-Y. Exploring the potential of global proteinвҲ’protein docking: an overview and critical assessment of current programs for automatic ab initio docking. Drug Discovery Today 2015, 20, 969вҲ’977. (2) Mosca, R.; Pons, T.; CГ©ol, A.; Valencia, A.; Aloy, P. Towards a detailed atlas of proteinвҲ’protein interactions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2013, 23, 929вҲ’940. (3) Kaczor, A. A.; Bartuzi, D.; Stepniewski, T. M.; Matosiuk, D.; Selent, J. Computational Drug Discovery and Design; Springer, 2018; pp 285вҲ’305. (4) Sprinzak, E.; Sattath, S.; Margalit, H. How reliable are experimental proteinвҲ’protein interaction data? J. Mol. Biol. 2003, 327, 919вҲ’923. (5) Mosca, R.; CГ©ol, A.; Aloy, P. Interactome3D: adding structural details to protein networks. Nat. Methods 2013, 10, 47вҲ’53. (6) Bonvin, A. M. Flexible proteinвҲ’protein docking. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2006, 16, 194вҲ’200. (7) Zacharias, M. Protein-protein complexes: Analysis, modeling and drug design; World Scientific, 2010. (8) Zacharias, M. Accounting for conformational changes during proteinвҲ’protein docking. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2010, 20, 180вҲ’186. (9) Huang, S.-Y. Search strategies and evaluation in proteinвҲ’protein docking: principles, advances and challenges. Drug Discovery Today 2014, 19, 1081вҲ’1096.

[Page 16]

(32) Wu, Y.; Lu, M.; Chen, M.; Li, J.; Ma, J. OPUS-Ca: A knowledgebased potential function requiring only CОұ positions. Protein Sci. 2007, 16, 1449вҲ’1463. (33) Grinter, S. Z.; Zou, X. A Bayesian statistical approach of improving knowledge-based scoring functions for proteinвҲ’ligand interactions. J. Comput. Chem. 2014, 35, 932вҲ’943. (34) Gohlke, H.; Case, D. A. Converging free energy estimates: MMPB (GB) SA studies on the proteinвҲ’protein complex RasвҲ’Raf. J. Comput. Chem. 2004, 25, 238вҲ’250. (35) Chen, F.; Liu, H.; Sun, H.; Pan, P.; Li, Y.; Li, D.; Hou, T. Assessing the performance of the MM/PBSA and MM/GBSA methods. 6. Capability to predict proteinвҲ’protein binding free energies and re-rank binding poses generated by proteinвҲ’protein docking. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2016, 18, 22129вҲ’22139. (36) Moreira, I. S.; Fernandes, P. A.; Ramos, M. J. ProteinвҲ’protein docking dealing with the unknown. J. Comput. Chem. 2009, 31, 317вҲ’ (37) Kollman, P. A.; Massova, I.; Reyes, C.; Kuhn, B.; Huo, S.; Chong, L.; Lee, M.; Lee, T.; Duan, Y.; Wang, W. Calculating structures and free energies of complex molecules: combining molecular mechanics and continuum models. Acc. Chem. Res. 2000, 33, 889вҲ’897. (38) Gilson, M. K.; Given, J. A.; Bush, B. L.; McCammon, J. A. The StatisticalThermodynamic Basis for Computation of Binding Affinities: A Critical Review. Biophys. J. 1997, 72, 1047вҲ’1069. (39) Woo, H.-J.; Roux, B. Calculation of absolute proteinвҲ’ligand binding free energy from computer simulations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2005, 102, 6825вҲ’6830. (40) Deng, Y.; Roux, B. Computations of Standard Binding Free Energies with Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2009, 113, 2234вҲ’2246. (41) Gumbart, J. C.; Roux, B.; Chipot, C. Efficient determination of proteinвҲ’protein standard binding free energies from first principles. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2013, 9, 3789вҲ’3798. (42) Zeller, F.; Zacharias, M. Adaptive biasing combined with Hamiltonian replica exchange to improve umbrella sampling free energy simulations. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2014, 10, 703вҲ’710. (43) Gumbart, J. C.; Roux, B.; Chipot, C. Standard binding free energies from computer simulations: What is the best strategy? J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2013, 9, 794вҲ’802. (44) Nguyen, H.; Roe, D. R.; Simmerling, C. Improved generalized born solvent model parameters for protein simulations. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2013, 9, 2020вҲ’2034. (45) Onufriev, A.; Bashford, D.; Case, D. A. Exploring protein native states and large-scale conformational changes with a modified generalized born model. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2004, 55, 383вҲ’394. (46) Gotz, A. W.; Williamson, M. J.; Xu, D.; Poole, D.; Le Grand, S.; Walker, R. C. Routine microsecond molecular dynamics simulations with AMBER on GPUs. 1. Generalized born. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2012, 8, 1542вҲ’1555. (47) Hwang, H.; Pierce, B.; Mintseris, J.; Janin, J.; Weng, Z. ProteinвҲ’ protein docking benchmark version 3.0. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2008, 73, 705вҲ’709. (48) de Vries, S. J.; Schindler, C. E.; Chauvot de BeauchГӘne, I.; Zacharias, M. A web interface for easy flexible proteinвҲ’protein docking with ATTRACT. Biophys. J. 2015, 108, 462вҲ’465. (49) Case, D.; Darden, T.; Cheatham, T., III; Simmerling, C.; Wang, J.; Duke, R.; Luo, R.; Walker, R.; Zhang, W.; Merz, K.; Paesani, F.; Roe, D.; Roitberg, A.; Sagui, C.; Salomon-Ferrer, R.; Seabra, G.; Simmerling, C.; Smith, W.; Swails, J.; Walker, R.; Wang, J.; Wolf, R.; Wu, X.; Kollman, P. AMBER 16; University of California: San Francisco, CA, (50) Hornak, V.; Abel, R.; Okur, A.; Strockbine, B.; Roitberg, A.; Simmerling, C. Comparison of multiple Amber force fields and development of improved protein backbone parameters. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Genet. 2006, 65, 712вҲ’725. (51) Grossfield, A. WHAM: an Implementation of the Weighted Histogram Analysis Method, Version 2.0. 9; Rochester University: Rochester, NY, 2013.

(52) Onufriev, A. Continuum electrostatics solvent modeling with the generalized Born model. Modeling Solvent Environments: Applications to Simulations of Biomolecules; John Wiley and Sons, 2010; pp 127вҲ’165. (53) Izadi, S.; Harris, R. C.; Fenley, M. O.; Onufriev, A. V. Accuracy comparison of generalized Born models in the calculation of electrostatic binding free energies. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018, 14, 1656вҲ’1670. (54) Dominguez, C.; Boelens, R.; Bonvin, A. M. J. J. HADDOCK: A protein-protein docking approach based on biochemical or biophysical information. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 1731вҲ’1737. (55) Aguilar, B.; Shadrach, R.; Onufriev, A. V. Reducing the secondary structure bias in the generalized Born model via R6 effective radii. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2010, 6, 3613вҲ’3630. (56) Kastritis, P. L.; Moal, I. H.; Hwang, H.; Weng, Z.; Bates, P. A.; Bonvin, A. M.; Janin, J. A structure-based benchmark for proteinвҲ’ protein binding affinity. Protein Sci. 2011, 20, 482вҲ’491. (57) Lou, H.; Cukier, R. I. Molecular dynamics of apo-adenylate kinase: a distance replica exchange method for the free energy of conformational fluctuations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2006, 110, 24121вҲ’24137. (58) Curuksu, J.; Sponer, J.; Zacharias, M. Elbow flexibility of the kt38 RNA kink-turn motif investigated by free-energy molecular dynamics simulations. Biophys. J. 2009, 97, 2004вҲ’2013.
