[Page 1]

Structural changes in chromosomes driven by multiple condensin motors during mitosis Graphical abstract

Authors Atreya Dey, Guang Shi, Ryota Takaki, D. Thirumalai

Correspondence dave.thirumalai@gmail.com

In brief Multiple condensin motors drive structural changes in chromosomes during mitosis. Dey et al. create a theoretical model to quantitatively predict these structures. The theory and a datadriven model quantitatively predict the experimental observations for two cell lines. The handedness of the helical mitotic structures changes randomly along the helical axis.

Highlights

Active polymer model accounts for chromosome organization through mitosis

Asymmetric loop extrusion by condensin motors describes mitotic structures

Mitotic chromosome structures are helical with a dynamically changing helix axis

Helical structures have random changes in handedness along the helical scaffold

Dey et al., 2023, Cell Reports 42, 112348 April 25, 2023 a 2023 The Authors. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112348

[Page 2]

Structural changes in chromosomes driven by multiple condensin motors during mitosis Atreya Dey,1 Guang Shi,2 Ryota Takaki,3 and D. Thirumalai1,4,5,* 1Department of Chemistry, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA 2Department of Materials Science, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA 3Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, Nöthnitzer Str.38, 01187 Dresden, Saxony, Germany 4Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA 5Lead contact *Correspondence: dave.thirumalai@gmail.com https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112348

SUMMARY

We create a computational framework that utilizes loop extrusion (LE) by multiple condensin I/II motors to predict changes in chromosome organization during mitosis. The theory accurately reproduces the experimental contact probability profiles for the mitotic chromosomes in HeLa and DT40 cells. The LE rate is smaller at the start of mitosis and increases as the cells approach metaphase. Condensin II-mediated mean loop size is about six times larger than loops because of condensin I. The loops, which overlap each other, are stapled to a central dynamically changing helical scaffold formed by the motors during the LE process. A polymer physics-based data-driven method that uses the Hi-C contact map as the only input shows that the helix is characterized as random helix perversions (RHPs) in which the handedness changes randomly along the scaffold. The theoretical predictions, which are testable using imaging experiments, do not contain any parameters.

INTRODUCTION Over the last decade, a variety of experimental tools have been developed, which have yielded unprecedented glimpses of the nuclear architecture. These methods fall under the rubric of chromosome conformation capture techniques (3C, 4C, 5C, Hi-C, and Micro-C).1–6 The output from a typical Hi-C experiment is extraction of the average contact map (CM), a matrix whose elements give the relative probability that two loci, separated by the genomic distance (s), are in spatial proximity. Although there are nuances in the organization of the genomes, the CMs reveal that there are at least two major length scales that characterize the structures of mammalian interphase chromosomes. Depending on the resolution of the Hi-C experiments, on scales of a kilobase pair to a megabase pair, active (euchromatin) and inactive (heterochromatin) loci undergo microphase separation7–10 into two compartments, which are manifested as checkerboard patterns in the ensemble-averaged CMs.4 On a smaller length scale, there are fine structures in the CMs that are referred to as topologically associating domains (TADs).2 As a cell transitions from interphase to mitosis, chromosome structures change dramatically. The distinct separation between euchromatin and heterochromatin that is prominent in interphase breaks down, and chromosomes become compact, adopting a characteristic rod-like or cylindrical shape.11–18 For a comprehensive overview of mitotic chromosomes, we refer the reader to a recent review.19 In an insightful study,20 Hi-C experiments were performed to monitor the changes in chicken DT40 cells as the

cells transitioned from G2 to mitotic phase. By building on earlier studies,21–30 the authors showed that the changes in organization in the chicken DT40 genome are driven by ATPase motors, condensin I and condensin II. The major findings of this study are as follows. (1) Less than 10 min after the cells enter prophase, signatures of compartment formation as well as the characteristics of TADs are lost. (2) In the time window 10 min % t % 60 min, the most prominent feature in the contact probability PðsÞ as a function of the genomic distance (s) between two loci is the emergence of a peak whose location shifts to higher s values as the cell cycle progress (see Figure 3A in Gibcus et al.20). (3) By successively depleting condensin II (CAP-H2-mAID in Figure 5A in Gibcus et al.20) and condensin I (CAP-H-mAID in Figure 5A in Gibcus et al.20), it was suggested that the presence of the peak and its movement to higher s values is due to the emergence of a helical scaffold. Moreover, the authors argued that formation of the helical structure is largely driven by the condensin II motor, with condensin I playing little or no role. Informed by the experimental observations,17,31–33 they also performed polymer simulations in which chromosomes were artificially confined to a cylinder and forced to adopt a static helical scaffold from which non-overlapping loops emanated. The parameters in the polymer model were adjusted to reproduce the observed PðsÞ versus s extracted from the Hi-C map. That the structures of the mitotic chromosome are likely to be helical was proposed long ago.15,17,34–39 However, the physical mechanisms that drive helix formation are not evident from HiC20 or from the more recent imaging experiments.40 In particular, there is no understanding of the roles played by multiple copies

Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023 a 2023 The Authors. 1 This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

[Page 3]

of the two motor proteins (condensin I and II) in shaping the chromosome structures during mitosis. This is a difficult problem to solve because a large number of motors (see supplemental information for an estimate of the number of motors) are involved in the loop extrusion (LE) process. Their structures and ATPase cycles (even for single condensin motors) have not been fully elucidated. A potential clue regarding how to proceed comes from several single-molecule experiments41,42), which have not only measured the speed of LE but have also shown that a single condensin molecule extrudes loops in a one-sided asymmetric manner or twosided symmetric fashion. The single-molecule studies set the stage for our theoretical investigations of the mitotic chromosome architecture involving multiple motors and how it changes as the cell cycle progress. To explain the experimental results, we first generalized the theory developed by Takaki et al.43 for LE for a single motor to multiple motors (details are given in STAR Methods) to determine the changes in the organization of chromosomes as the cell progresses through different stages of the mitosis cycle. The extruded loops were then used in a polymer model that is based on the generalized Rouse model for chromosomes (GRMC).44–46 The resulting active GRMC (A-GRMC) model without any adjustable parameter shows that asymmetric LE alone can create mitotic chromosome structures, observed in HeLa and DT40 cells.20,47 To reproduce PðsÞ at various time points (t = 7:5; 10; 15 and 30 min) in the cell cycle of the condensin II-depleted chicken DT40 cells, we found that it was necessary to vary the step sizes taken by the motor. The A-GRMC does not quantitatively account for the dependence of PðsÞ on s for the condensin I-depleted DT40 cells, which suggests that the coordinated action of condensin II motors in generating long loops has to differ from condensin I, which generates shorter loops on an average. To complement the A-GRMC predictions, we calculated the three-dimensional (3D) structures of the chromosomes throughout the cell cycle for DT40 cells using the Hi-C-polymer-physics-structures (HIPPS) method.48 The calculated PðsÞ using the predicted 3D structures agree quantitatively with the experimental data at all times. By computing the angular correlation function using the calculated structures, we show that the helical conformations emerge naturally as the cells transition to the mitotic phase. The 3D structures suggest that the loops in the mitotic chromosomes are arranged around a helical scaffold, which changes from one realization to another. The helical regions randomly alternate in chirality, suggestive of random helix (or tendril) perversion (RHP). Through a combination of the A-GRMC theory and the calculated 3D structures using the HIPPS method, we account nearly quantitatively for many (if not all) aspects of the structural changes in chromosomes during mitosis. RESULTS A-GRMC calculations quantitatively reproduce PðsÞ for mitotic chromosomes The theory for LE by multiple condensin motors is based on the mechanism sketched in Figure 1. The physical picture relies on the scrunching mechanism,43,49 which assumes that the heads of the motors that are bound to the DNA are relatively immobile, whereas the hinge moves toward the stationary heads during the catalytic cycle. Loops are extruded by repeated transition of

2 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023

the hinge toward the motor heads through an asymmetric allosteric LE mechanism.43 The parameters needed for the A-GRMC simulations (Table S5) are either taken or inferred from experiments (see details in the STAR Methods). The experimental data are shown in Tables S1–S4). Figure 2A shows a snapshot of the loop conformation generated by multiple motors in a 10-Mbp chromosome (also shown in Video S2). The helix-like scaffold is generated by the motor proteins to which the loops are stapled. We find evidence of Z loops and nested loops (Figure 2B) in the stochastic kinetic simulations based on A-GRMC. The loops, extruded by condensin I, are, on an average, smaller in size compared with the ones generated by condensin II (Figure 2C, Video S1). Because the linear density of condensin I is greater than condensin II, the loops extruded by the former resemble a dense polymer brush-like structure. On the other hand, loops generated by condensin II are fewer in number but longer, which facilitates formation of long-range contacts between the loci. It is worth pointing out that the helical scaffold and, hence, the structures of the mitotic chromosomes vary from one realization to another. The A-GRMC simulations also show that the majority of the loops are nested and are interspersed with a smaller fraction of Z-loops (Figure 2D). The actual numbers are shown in Figure S3. Finally, the calculations using the scrunching mechanism quantitatively account for the dependence of PðsÞ on s for HeLa cells and DT40 cells (Figure 2E). The results in Figure 2 provide a mechanistic basis for generating the dynamical helical scaffold created by multiple condensin motors in the two cell types. Symmetric LE It has been suggested41 that LE by a single yeast condensin motor is strictly asymmetric. In contrast, a more recent study42 claims that LE by human condensin could be symmetric and asymmetric. Both mechanisms might be operative in Xenopus eggs.50 It is possible that LE is mostly asymmetric during metaphase and symmetric during interphase.51 To reconcile, at least partially, these seemingly opposing conclusions, we altered the LE scheme to investigate the consequences of symmetric LE on PðsÞ as a function of s. As shown in Figure 3A, we randomly exchanged the mobile and static sites to allow a loop to form and grow on both sides. This is achieved by randomly switching the mobile and static sites with each other. If the probability of switching is equal, then a loop could grow on both sides, thus creating symmetric extrusion. In Figures 3B and 3C, we show two possible mechanisms for symmetric LE within the scrunching mechanism. Figure 3B illustrates that the loop itself is held between the two heads, while the hinge randomly binds to either side of the loop, resulting in symmetric LE. In Figure 3C, the loop is held at one of the two heads, and the hinge binds and reels in DNA from the opposite side. In this scenario, condensin has to shuttle the loop back and forth between the two heads, creating an effective symmetric extrusion. Experiments could be designed to assess the validity of either of the mechanisms. We find that fully symmetric extrusion and asymmetric extrusion result in the same PðsÞ versus s (Figure 3D). HeLa cells Figure 3D shows that asymmetric extrusion coupled with natural formation of Z-loops and nested loops using the A-GRMC

[Page 4]

Figure 1. Mechanism of multiple-condensindriven LE using A-GRMC (A) Schematic of the structural features of a condensin (I or II) motor. The representation of the fixed sites (heads) and mobile sites (hinge) is based on the scrunching mechanism. The mobile and static sites of condensin are shown as red circles and blue squares, respectively. (B) The dark blue arrows show the direction of LE by condensin. The green semicircle represents the extruded loop. Condensin motors bind to DNA with probability pon and unbind with probability poff , shown with black arrows. The mobile site takes a step (shown with small blue arrows) with probability Pstep at each time step. When the motor stops, loops are extruded unidirectionally with a step size that is sampled from Equation 4. Only the mobile site moves along the DNA. The movement is paused for t p = 7 s when the motor encounters another site (mobile or static). The chromosome, which is divided into 10-kbp monomers, is shown in blue. Adjacent loci are linked by harmonic springs, and looped loci are connected by harmonic springs as well (green). The mobile and static heads of condensin are shown as red circles and squares, respectively.

simulations also reproduces mitotic chromosome structures in HeLa cells.47 As shown in Table S5, a 100-Mbp HeLa cell chromosome has z343 condensin II and z2; 553 condensin I molecules, as calculated based on experimental measurements (STAR Methods). Of these, on an average, z 210 condensin II and z1205 condensin I molecules are bound to the chromosome. Of 1,415 bound condensin molecules, z 97% are involved in one or more nested loops, and z 45% participate in one or more Z-loops. These results show that overlapping loops and Z-loops ensure that the loops generated by multiple motors densely cover the entire chromosome without gaps. Time-dependent changes in the mean loop length The dependence of the average loop size changes as a function of time. Figure 4A shows that the loop sizes, averaged over 500 LE realizations, increase rapidly and saturate to a fixed value. The individual traces of the average loop sizes for five realizations reveal little change from one initial condition to another (Figure 4B). The average size of the loops generated by condensin I (z 250 kbp) is about six times smaller (Figure 4A) than those generated by condensin II (z1; 500 kbp). The long-range contacts established by condensin II motors likely stabilize the helical scaffold, whereas

the preponderance of short-range contacts, driven by condensin I, are responsible for overall compaction. Similarly, it takes longer (by about an order of magnitude) for condensin II to extrude a long loop, even though the LE velocity is the same for the two types of motors. Comparison of the calculated PðsÞ as a function of s with experiments, with only condensin I at t = 60 min (Figure 4C), shows reasonable agreement. The decay of PðsÞ occurs in two steps. On the scale s % 1Mbp s, coinciding roughly with the size of the TADs, we find that PðsÞ s 0:7 , whereas PðsÞ s 3=2 for s > 1Mbp. The values of the two exponents, calculated using the A-GRMC theory, are in reasonable agreement with experiments. Fits to the experimental PðsÞ versus s (Figure 4C) yield PðsÞ s 0:5 (s % 1Mbp s) and PðsÞ s 1:9 (s > 1Mbp). Although qualitatively similar, the agreement between our calculations and experiments for PðsÞ in condensin I-depleted cells is less satisfactory for s % 1Mbp s (Figure 4D). The CMs corresponding to Figures 4C and 4D are shown in Figure S7A. The calculated exponent and that extracted from the Hi-C data are 1.1 and 0.7, respectively. On scales greater than s > 1Mbp, the values of the exponent characterizing the decay of PðsÞ coincide. Figures S2A and S2B show a comparison of the A-GRMC calculations with previous simulations from Gibcus et al.20 Effects of condensin I and condensin II depletion Because condensin I and II are involved in mitotic chromosome formation, it is important to determine the differential contribution of the two motors in determining the dependence of PðsÞ on s. It is known that condensin I and condensin II bind to chromosomes independently at different stages,52,53 with the latter

[Page 5]

extruding larger loops because of the increased lifetime of the bound state (Figure 4A). The distinct roles played by condensin I and condensin II were examined by selectively depleting the two motors.20 It was noticed that, when both motors are simultaneously present, there is a peak in the PðsÞ in the DT40 chromosomes. The location of the peak moves to larger s values that is accompanied by an increase in the magnitude of PðsÞ as the cell cycle proceeds toward mitosis. To determine the origin of the bump, the motors were selectively degraded, allowing them to infer PðsÞ as a function of s in the presence of only one of the motors. An important experimental finding is that the bump in PðsÞ is predominantly driven by condensin II, with condensin I playing little or no role. To assess the accuracy of the A-GRMC calculations, we calculated PðsÞ by selectively depleting the condensin motors. The results for condension II-depleted DT40 cells are shown in Figures 5A, 5C, and 5E. Using Pstep = 1, there is reasonable agreement between the calculated and measured PðsÞ as a function of s. We optimized the step size to obtain the smallest error between simulations and experiments. The values of the optimized Pstep change with time (Figure 5A), which implies that the mean step size the motors take vary as mitosis progresses. The optimal values of Pstep as a function of time are displayed in Figure 5C. Figure 5E shows that, at the optimized Pstep , our theory quantitatively reproduces the measured20 PðsÞ curves at all times. Based on the results in Figure 5, we speculate that the variation in Pstep implies that the mechanical tension along the chromosomes changes as cells progress to mitosis. The results for condensin I-depleted cells are plotted in Figures 5B, 5D, and 5F. The results for PðsÞ as a function of s, 4 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023

Figure 2. Loop generation mechanism (A) A snapshot of a structure, generated in the A-GRMC simulations of the mitotic chromosomes, shows the backbone formed by the condensin molecules. Condensin I motors are shown in dark blue, whereas condensin II is shown in red. The magnified regions show an example of a Z-loop formed by two condensin I molecules and a nested loop formed by two condensin II molecules, respectively. For the Z-loop, the two loops are colored in cyan and green. For the nested loop, the larger loop is shown in transparent colors, while the smaller loop is shown in cyan. (B) Cartoon depicting two condensin molecules involved in a Z-loop and a nested loop. The overlapping segment of the chromatin between each loop is highlighted. (C) A snapshot of condensin I and II loops in 10 Mbp of DNA. Examples of the Z-loops and the nested loops in either condensin are highlighted. (D) Fraction of condensin motors involved in formation of a Z-loop or nested loop as a function of time. (E) PðsÞ in the metaphase chromosomes from different experiments and cell types along with the predictions of the A-GRMC calculations (dashed lines). The A-GRMC calculations fall within the spread of the PðsÞ in the experiments.

calculated at the optimum Pstep values, are shown in Figure 5D; the errors between the calculated and experimental PðsÞ are shown in Figure 5B. Although the agreement between theory and experiments is reasonable (Figure 5F), the simulations do not capture the prominent bump in the PðsÞ when only condensin II is present. The bump in PðsÞ is an indication of the underlying helical structure of mitotic chromosomes.20 To obtain helical structures, the model must contain anisotropic interactions between the chromosomes and the motors. The absence of such interactions in the A-GRMC simulations explains the lack of the pronounced bump in PðsÞ when condensin I is depleted. Impact of the motor residence time, pausing time, and density of motors on PðsÞ We explored the effects of changing the parameters in the A-GRMC on PðsÞ as a function of s. The results are shown in Figure S4. Lifetime of bound condensin motors Figure S4A shows that increasing the residence time of condensin motors leads to additional long-range contacts, which is reflected in a plateau-like feature in PðsÞ for s > 105 bp. As shown in Equation 2 in the STAR Methods, the unbinding probability of condensin molecules, poff , is inversely proportional to the residence time. Thus, increasing the residence time decreases poff , which, in turn, increases the lifetime of condensins that are bound to DNA. As a consequence, longer loops form, which enhance the PðsÞ value at large s. A corollary of this finding is that the longer loops driven by condensin II are due to the enhanced residence time of condensin II (z6 min) on the chromosome compared with condensin I (z2 min).

[Page 6]

Figure 3. Symmetric versus asymmetric LE (A) Symmetric extrusion is realized by exchanging the mobile and static sites (see also Figure 1). The cartoon shows possible mechanisms of symmetric extrusion according to the scrunching mechanism. (B) The hinge can bind to both sides of the loop, and the loop is held between the two heads. (C) The extrusion switches between two forms in the asymmetric extrusion. (D) Data for PðsÞ versus s for mitotic chromosomes for HeLa cells from experiments47 compared with A-GRMC calculations using symmetric and asymmetric extrusion. Symmetric and asymmetric extrusion can reproduce the same PðsÞ curves.

of appropriate sizes. It is likely that these parameters depend on the chromosomes and the cell type as well.

Pausing time The effect of changing the pausing time, t p , has the opposite effect compared with increasing the residence time. Figure S4B shows that, upon increasing t p , the probability of contact formation for s > 105 bp sharply decreases. Comparison of the predicted and measured PðsÞ shows that the optimal value of t p is about 4 8 seconds. Our theory, therefore, could be used to extract the residence and the pausing times of condensin motors by fitting the predictions to the experimental PðsÞ versus s. Number of bound motors The number of bound condensins (nb ) also influences the shape of the PðsÞ curves, as shown in Figure S4C. Because pon f 1= ðnt =nb 1Þ (see Equation 3 in the STAR Methods), consequently increasing nb while keeping nt constant leads to a larger binding probability pon . The increase in the density of bound condensins to DNA results in more loops being extruded. In addition, the values of PðsÞ should be larger at large s values. However, when all available condensins are bound, the PðsÞ does not change. The best fit to experiments shows that, on average, the number of bound condensins I is Nb = 255 (Figure S4C). We also calculated PðsÞ by varying the pon =poff (Figure S4D), which is similar to changing nb =ðnt nb Þ. Higher values of pon =poff result in more bound condensins, resulting in extrusion of longer loops. Taken together, these results suggest that the biologically relevant parameters tp , t B , and nb are optimized to extrude loops

Helical structures of mitotic chromosomes are predicted using a data-driven method To assess whether the bump in PðsÞ could be reproduced and explained in terms of helical (or related) conformations, we used the HIPPS method.48 As a complement to the A-GRMC simulations and to compare the extent of helix formation in DT40 and HeLa cells, we calculated PðsÞ at different time points as the cell transitions from interphase to the mitotic phase using the HIPPS method, which predicts an ensemble of 3D chromosome structures with the measured Hi-C maps as the only input (STAR Methods). The dependence of PðsÞ on s for condensin I-depleted chromosomes in DT40 cells, calculated using the 3D structures, is in quantitative agreement (Figure 6A) with experiments at all times. In particular, the HIPPS method accounts for the pronounced peak (Figure 6B), which, as we show below, is important in producing structures with RHP. Naturally, the predictions are also quantitative for DT40 chromosomes when both motors are present (Figure 6C). It is also gratifying that the calculated and measured PðsÞ for HeLa cells are also accurate (Figure 6D). Periodicity in angular correlation functions With the 3D coordinates of the loci at hand, we quantified the extent of helix formation at different times in the DT40 cell as it goes through the phases in the cell cycle. To this end, we used the angular correlation function CðsÞ = Cri;i + d $ ri + s;i + s + d D

where ri;j is the vector between the ith and jth loci, and d = 3248. For a perfect helix, CðsÞ should be periodic, with a period that is proportional to the helical pitch (Figure S5). In Figure 7A, which shows CðsÞ as a function of s at different times, upon condensin

[Page 7]

Figure 4. Time evolution of loop sizes and PðsÞ curves for DT40 cells (A) Average loop size as a function of time for condensin I without condension II (blue) and condensin II without condensin I (red) from A-GRMC calculations. The mean loop sizes generated by condensin II are greater than the ones generated by condensin I even though the number of condensin I is larger than condensin II. (B) Evolution of average loop size in 5 independent simulations for condensin I and II. The figure shows that the mean loop size is reached rapidly within 1,000 s after the extrusion process starts. (C) Comparison of the dependence of PðsÞ on s predicted by A-GRMC calculations and experiments at t = 60 min upon depletion of condensin II. (D) PðsÞ versus s for condensin I-depleted chromosomes at t = 60 min compared with the A-GRMC calculations. The red-dotted line indicates the average loop length. (C) and (D) show a much sharper decrease in PðsÞ when s exceeds the average loop length. The small and larger exponent values are calculated between 1 and 90 kbp and 10–100 Mbp, respectively.

pears to be less prominent at t = 60 min compared with t = 30 min.

II depletion, we see that there are small but discernible peaks at t = 15; 30 and 60 min. The locations of the peaks change from sz2:5 Mbp (t = 15 mins) to sz7:5 Mbp (t = 60 mins). Thus, even in the absence of condensin II, we predict that there is a tendency toward helix formation, which is likely masked in the isotropic ensemble-averaged PðsÞ, especially when the bump in PðsÞ is not prominent. It is worth noting that both experiments and our calculations show that there is a minor shoulder in the PðsÞ plots even in the absence of condensin II (Figure 6A). When only condensin II is present (CAP-H-mAID in the notation used in experiments, where CAP-H stands for chromosomeassociated protein H and mAID stands for minimal auxin inducible degron), the amplitudes and the number of peaks increase (Figure 7B) as time progresses. Just as in experiments (see the right panel in Figure 5A in the experimental study by Gibcus et al.20), Figure 7B shows that the peak is most prominent at t = 10 min (red), t = 15 min (orange), and t = 30 min (purple). The peak positions shift to larger values of s as the cell cycle progresses toward mitosis. Remarkably, these features are in quantitative agreement with experiments without having to adjust any parameter to fit the experimental data. We compare the CðsÞ plots at t = 30 min (Figure 7C) and t = 60 min (Figure 7D) in the wild-type (WT), condensin I and condensin II depleted structures. At both time points, the periodicity is more prominent for condensin IIdepleted chromosomes than it is when condensin I is depleted. In accordance with experiments, the extent of helix formation ap-

6 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023

Helix formation is weaker in HeLa cell chromosomes It is instructive to compare the s-dependent CðsÞ for HeLa and DT40 cells (Figure 7D). There are two significant differences. (1) The peak position in PðsÞ for the chromosomes in the HeLa cell (purple line in Figure 7D) is at a smaller s value compared with the DT40 cells at t = 60 min (blue in Figure 7D). (2) More importantly, the number of peaks, indicating the extent of helix propagation along the genomic distance, is lower in the HeLa cell relative to the DT40 cell. This shows that the extent of helix formation depends on the species and the cell type. Examples of the structural ensemble are given in Figure 7F. The amplitude of the Fourier transform of CðsÞ (Figure 7E) for condensin I/II chromosomes at t = 30 and t = 60 min for the WT DT40 and mitotic HeLa cells exhibits prominent peaks for condensin II and DT40 WT cells containing both motors. In contrast, the amplitudes are smaller for HeLa cells and condensin II-depleted DT40 cells, implying that the degree of helix structure is less in HeLa cells. Examples from the structural ensemble are shown in Figure 7F. RHP in mitotic chromosomes The precise structural features of mitotic chromosomes have not been firmly established even though several studies15,54 have shown that they must be helical. That there is an underlying periodicity in the structures is clear from the CðsÞ as a function of s (Figure 7 and Figure S5). However, from these results we cannot determine whether the helix is left- or right-handed because CðsÞ = Cð sÞ. For instance, CðsÞ for a perfect helix is identical regardless of the handedness (Figure S5). Similarly, simulations

[Page 8]

Figure 5. Effect of step size on PðsÞ for DT40 cells

that impose helical conformations and adjust the parameters to fit the PðsÞ data also cannot determine the handedness unambiguously because PðsÞ does not contain the information required to make this distinction. We used the 3D structures to characterize the nature of the mitotic structures. To get insights into plausible arrangements, we first created synthetic structures that are perfectly helical (left or right handed). Not unexpectedly, CðsÞ for these structures is periodic, with peaks (and valleys) occurring at s values that are integer multiples of the helix pitch, p (measured in megabase pair units; Figure S5). However, they do not match the calculated CðsÞ from the 3D structures determined using HIPPS. We next generated synthetic structures with RHP by randomly altering the handedness across the entire mitotic chromosomes (see STAR Methods for details). The random feature is controlled by the parameter r, which is zero for a perfectly periodic helix. For r = 0:01, the CðsÞ for the synthetic structures and the results in Figure 7B are similar.

(A, C, and E) Results for condensin II-depleted cells. (B, D, and F) Results for condensin I-depleted cells. (A) Mean-squared error (s2 ; defined in Equation 17 in STAR Methods) between PðsÞ calculated using A-GRMC and Hi-C at different times for condensin I. (B) Same as (A) except these are for condensin I-depleted cells. (C) Optimal values of Pstep corresponding to the Pstep that produces the minimum in s2 in (A). The lines are from theory, and the dashed curves are experimental data. (D) Same as (C) except the results are for condensin I-depleted cells. (E) Comparison of PðsÞ versus s at different times between the theoretical predictions and experiments for condensin II-depleted cells. The optimal values of Pstep are given. (F) Same as (E) except the results are for condensin I-depleted cells. The arrows indicate the bumps in the PðsÞ.

The results in Figure S5 suggest that, in all likelihood, mitotic structures have RHP (a term coined first by Maxwell as reported elsewhere55,56) with alterations in handedness occurring randomly. To affirm this possibility, we calculated the helix order parameter57 expressed in terms of an angle c, which could be used to extract the local handedness (see supplemental information for definition of c and the implementation in the context of mitotic chromosomes). Using the 3D coordinates of 1,000 mitotic structures at t = 30 min, we calculated the distributions of c for the ensemble of structures and a single structure. The c distribution averaged over the 1,000 conformations is broad, with a mean cz0. Although, for a single conformation, the distribution of c peaks at cs0, it is not far from zero. Indeed, the c distribution in Figure S6F shows that left- and right-handed chiral orders coexist in almost equal numbers in a single conformation. We conclude that each conformation, with a signature of RHP globally, may only have a modest propensity to be left or right handed. DISCUSSION We developed a theory based on LE driven by multiple condensin I and condensin II motors to determine the structural changes that occur in chromosomes as the cell cycles from the G2 phase to metaphase. The resulting A-GRMC has two components: (1) a kinetic scheme to determine the dynamics of LE mediated by multiple condensin I/II molecules and (2) a polymer model that takes the location of loop anchors generated by the condensin

[Page 9]

Figure 6. Comparison of calculated PðsÞ using the HIPPS method (solid lines) with experiments (dashed lines) (A) PðsÞ from experiments for DT40 cells with only condensin I (condensin II depleted) at various times compared with the HIPPS calculations. (B) Same as (A) except the comparison between the HIPPS predictions and experiments correspond to condensin I-depleted cells. (C) 1⁄2PðsÞ; s from experiments for cells with both condensins (WT) at various times compared with the corresponding HIPPS calculations. (A–C) Results for DT40 cells. (D) Comparison between HIPPS predictions and experiments for HeLa cells.47

motors as input to generate 3D structures of chromosomes. The kinetic scheme is rooted in the scrunching mechanism, discovered first in the context of DNA transcription bubble formation in bacteria,58 which has recently been invoked to explain the LE mechanism of a single condensin motor.43,49 Using the A-GRMC together with the results from the HIPPS method, we uantitatively accounted for all experimental data. (1) The calculations based on the A-GRMC accurately predict the behavior of PðsÞ for mitotic chromosomes in HeLa cells and DT40 chicken cells when condensin II is depleted. (2) The predictions using the A-GRMC are less accurate when only condensin II is present. In particular, the bump in the PðsÞ, whose origin is linked to helix formation in mitotic chromosomes, is not predicted by the A-GRMC theory. (3) Remarkably, the calculations using the HIPPS method predict, with high accuracy, the behavior of PðsÞ for DT40 cells in the presence of both motors and, upon depletion of the two motors, one at a time. In a sense, the HIPPS method solves the problem by predicting the helical structures with periodicity as the cell cycle progress from interphase to mitosis. (4) We found that the extent of helix formation in mitotic chromosomes depends on the cell type. For HeLa cells, the peak in PðsÞ is less pronounced compared with DT40 cells, which is also reflected in the angular correlation function (CðsÞ). (5) We find that, even with only condensin I present, there are signatures of weak helix formation in CðsÞ calculated from the 3D structures. The structures of the mitotic chromosome have the characteristics of RHP, in which the helix handedness changes randomly throughout the chromosome.

8 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023

Dynamical nature of the chromosomal axis The cylindrical-shaped mitotic chromosome structure, which emerges naturally in our study, may be thought of as having a scaffold axis, which traces the positions of condensin I and II. The extruded loops, with variable length, are stapled to the scaffold. Because the mitotic chromosome axis is helical, the loops that emanate from the motor proteins trace a helical path. The path traced by the motors is not static because their formation is controlled by at least three timescales that determine the dynamic nature of the helical axis. (1) One is the average LE time. Using the mean loop length for condensin I (z 25 kbp) and 150 kbp for condensin II (Figure 4A) and the LE velocity (z 1,500 bp/s) for extrusion by a single motor, the extrusion time is 200 s for condensin I and 1,000 s for condensin II. When multiple motors are involved, the time increases by an order of magnitude (Figure 4A). (2) The lifetimes of bound condensins are estimated to be 120 s and 360 s for condensin I and condensin II, respectively. (3) The overall transition time to go from G2 phase to prometaphase is about 30 min in DT40 cells. The first two timescales are less than the cell cycle time, which implies that the motors attach and detach multiple times as the cells transition from G2 to prometaphase. This implies that the loops must be dynamic and that, more importantly, the scaffold is unlikely to be static. Only by averaging over many realizations does an ensemble-averaged backbone structure with possibly complicated helical arrangement (see below) emerge. Arrangement of loops Microscopy experiments59,60 have suggested that the shape of the chromosome is cylindrical, with the condensin and topoisomerase molecules forming a central axis. It is thought that the loops are roughly perpendicular to the putative central axis, which is dynamic, as evidenced by the observed heterogeneity of the structures. Our calculations show that the loops are not arranged in a strictly consecutive non-overlapping fashion because the orientations and the binding sites of the condensins are random and vary from one realization (or cell) to another. The

[Page 10]

Figure 7. Angular correlation (CðsÞ) as a function of genomic distance at different times

(A) CðsÞ as a function of s at various times for DT40 cells without condensin II. A peak at sz5Mb with a small amplitude that is most pronounced at t = 15 min (orange line) suggests that condensin I alone induces helix formation but not as much as condensin II. (B) CðsÞ as a function of time for condensin II chromosomes (condensin I-depleted) in DT40 cells. The periodicity (roughly 10 Mbs), especially at t = 30 min, is a signature of helix formation. (C) Comparison of CðsÞ versus s for WT (blue) condensin I-depleted cells (orange) and condensin II-depleted (red) DT40 cells at t = 30 min. (D) Same as (C) except these correspond to t = 60 min. Also shown is PðsÞ versus s for HeLa cells (violet), which illustrates less prominent helicity. (E) Fourier transform of CðsÞ as a function of s 1 shows that, in the amplitude spectrum, condensin II chromosomes demonstrate stronger peaks compared with condensin I chromosomes. The peaks for HeLa cells are weaker peaks compared with DT40 cells. (F) Example structures constructed from HIPPS for t = 30 min condensin I/II along with WT DT40 cells at t = 60 min and HeLa cells. The structures show that the HIPPS method accurately predicts the expected conformal features in the mitotic chromosome.

combination of nested loops and Z-loops creates structures that bear some resemblance to polymer bottle brushes, except that the central axis dynamically changes because the motors bind and unbind several times during the cell cycle.

implies that the establishment of longrange contacts between distant loci requires condensin II, whereas condensin I assists with generation of short-ranged contacts. Coincidentally, the short-range contacts occur on length scales that are characteristic of TAD sizes, whereas the genomic size of long-range contacts is associated with compartment sizes. The 3D structures generated by the HIPPS method shows (Figure 7B) an emergent length scale at sz10 Mbp in CðsÞ, which coincides with the peak in PðsÞ at t = 30 min (Figure 6B). To the extent that rigidity arises from the periodic structure, we surmise that condensin II might determine the backbone stiffness.52

Roles of condensin I and condensin II in shaping the mitotic chromosomes Since the pioneering discovery of condensin II,53 there have been several studies28,52,61 that have probed the differing roles these motors play in formation of mitotic chromosomes. Although condensin I and II load onto chromosomes independently, with the former gaining access only after breakdown of the nuclear envelope, both are required for mitotic chromosome assembly. It has been suggested23 that condensin II imparts rigidity to the chromosomal axis, whereas condensin I enables lateral compaction. The A-GRMC simulations show that condensin II extrudes long loops (by a factor of six) compared with condensin I. This

RHP Although the radial loop model, extracted from micrographs,15 seems to suggest that mitotic chromosomes are left handed, this issue has not been settled and has come to focus in a recent insightful imaging study.40 The authors propose that the helix is best described as a periodic helix (or tendril) perversion (PHP). The PHP is a perfect repeat of monomer units. Each unit consists of one left- and one right-handed helix. For structures with PHP, CðsÞ is shown in Figure S5 for synthetically generated structures. Comparison of CðsÞ predicted by the HIPPS method and CðsÞ for structures with PHP shows qualitative differences. Although we established that the HIPPS method, which uses Hi-C data as

[Page 11]

input, quantitatively reproduces PðsÞ at all time points, the consequences of ensemble averaging and lack of error estimates in the Hi-C experiments make it hard to assess the reliability of drawing firm conclusions about the details of mitotic structures. Therefore, additional super-resolution imaging studies, which can determine structures at the single-chromosome level, will be required to definitely address the nature of helix perversion in mitotic chromosomes. That nature would choose helix perversion might be related to stability, which was already noted by Darwin62 in the context of creeping plants. The conclusions reached here concerning RHP are not inconsistent with a recent study,63 which used an entirely different approach. In that study, Hi-C data for mitotic chromosomes were used as input to determine the parameters of an assumed energy function using the maximum entropy method. Most interestingly, the authors found that the structures, obtained by simulations of the energy functions with learned parameters obtained by fitting to the Hi-C data, showed that the overall shape of the mitotic chromosomes is cylindrical, consisting of a mixture of left- and right-handed helices, implying that chiral symmetry is spontaneously broken. The resulting structures, on an average, are likely to be similar to our findings. In summary, we have introduced a model that could be a reasonable starting point for elucidating the mechanism for predicting multiple condensin-driven structural changes that occur during the mitotic cycle. In combination with the HIPPS method, we have derived plausible structures of mitotic chromosomes. Despite some success, the difficult problem of cooperation between hundreds of condensin (and other) motors remains a daunting challenge. Limitations of the study The most glaring weakness of our study is that the calculated PðsÞ using the A-GRMC model in the presence of only condension II (condension I is depleted) is not in quantitative agreement with experimental measurements. The chromosome structure, upon condensin I depletion, does have a cylindrical shape, but the bump in PðsÞ that moves to larger values of s as the cell cycle proceeds toward mitosis is not captured. Although we quantitatively reproduced the experimental PðsÞ using the HIPPS method, it does not reveal the mechanism by which multiple condensin II motors extrude long loops to generate the RHP structures. The differences in the PðsÞ obtained upon depletion of condensin I (condensin II) suggests that there could be subtle but important differences in the LE mechanism employed by the two motors even though their structures, except for the non-SMC (structural maintenance of chromosomes) parts, are similar. STAR+METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

B Lead contact B Material availability

10 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023

B Data and code availability d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS d METHOD DETAILS

B Loop extrusions (LE) by multiple condensins B Kinetic simulations for multi-condensin LE B A-GRMC B Hi-C-polymer-physics-structures (HIPPS) d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

B Estimates of pon and poff B Calculation of the number of steps per second B PðsÞ is captured using rouse model B Calculations of contact map and structures using A-

GRMC B HIPPS calculations B Assessing the handedness of mitotic structures SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j. celrep.2023.112348. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Kiran Kumari, Xin Li, and Sucheol Shin for useful discussions. This work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation (CHE19-00033) and the Welch Foundation through the Collie-Welch Chair (F-0019). AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS A.D. and D.T. designed the research. A.D., G.S., and R.T. performed the research. All authors analyzed the data. A.D. and D.T. wrote the paper with input from G.S. and R.T. DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests. INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY We support inclusive, diverse, and equitable conduct of research. Received: June 29, 2022 Revised: November 10, 2022 Accepted: March 21, 2023 Published: April 6, 2023 REFERENCES 1. Dekker, J., Rippe, K., Dekker, M., and Kleckner, N. (2002). Capturing chromosome conformation. Science 295, 1306–1311. 2. Dixon, J.R., Selvaraj, S., Yue, F., Kim, A., Li, Y., Shen, Y., Hu, M., Liu, J.S., and Ren, B. (2012). Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of chromatin interactions. Nature 485, 376–380. 3. Hsieh, T.-H.S., Weiner, A., Lajoie, B., Dekker, J., Friedman, N., and Rando, O.J. (2015). Mapping nucleosome resolution chromosome folding in yeast by micro-c. Cell 162, 108–119. 4. Lieberman-Aiden, E., Van Berkum, N.L., Williams, L., Imakaev, M., Ragoczy, T., Telling, A., Amit, I., Lajoie, B.R., Sabo, P.J., Dorschner, M.O., et al. (2009). Comprehensive mapping of long-range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome. Science 326, 289–293. 5. Rao, S.S.P., Huntley, M.H., Durand, N.C., Stamenova, E.K., Bochkov, I.D., Robinson, J.T., Sanborn, A.L., Machol, I., Omer, A.D., Lander, E.S., and

[Page 12]

Aiden, E.L. (2014). A 3d map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of chromatin looping. Cell 159, 1665–1680. 6. Van Steensel, B., and Dekker, J. (2010). Genomics tools for unraveling chromosome architecture. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 1089–1095. 7. Belaghzal, H., Borrman, T., Stephens, A.D., Lafontaine, D.L., Venev, S.V., Weng, Z., Marko, J.F., and Dekker, J. (2021). Liquid chromatin hi-c characterizes compartment-dependent chromatin interaction dynamics. Nat. Genet. 53, 367–378. 8. Brackley, C.A., and Marenduzzo, D. (2020). Bridging-induced microphase separation: photobleaching experiments, chromatin domains and the need for active reactions. Brief. Funct. Genomics 19, 111–118. 9. Jost, D., Carrivain, P., Cavalli, G., and Vaillant, C. (2014). Modeling epigenome folding: formation and dynamics of topologically associated chromatin domains. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 9553–9561. 10. Shi, G., Liu, L., Hyeon, C., and Thirumalai, D. (2018). Interphase human chromosome exhibits out of equilibrium glassy dynamics. Nat. Commun. 9, 3161.

26. Hudson, D.F., Vagnarelli, P., Gassmann, R., and Earnshaw, W.C. (2003). Condensin is required for nonhistone protein assembly and structural integrity of vertebrate mitotic chromosomes. Dev. Cell 5, 323–336. 27. Oliveira, R.A., Coelho, P.A., and Sunkel, C.E. (2005). The condensin i subunit barren/cap-h is essential for the structural integrity of centromeric heterochromatin during mitosis. Mol. Cell Biol. 25, 8971–8984. 28. Ono, T., Fang, Y., Spector, D.L., and Hirano, T. (2004). Spatial and temporal regulation of condensins i and ii in mitotic chromosome assembly in human cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 15, 3296–3308. 29. Siddiqui, N.U., Rusyniak, S., Hasenkampf, C.A., and Riggs, C.D. (2006). Disruption of the arabidopsis smc4 gene, atcap-c, compromises gametogenesis and embryogenesis. Planta 223, 990–997. 30. Strunnikov, A.V., Hogan, E., and Koshland, D. (1995). Smc2, a saccharomyces cerevisiae gene essential for chromosome segregation and condensation, defines a subgroup within the smc family. Genes Dev. 9, 587–599. 31. Earnshaw, W.C., and Laemmli, U.K. (1983). Architecture of metaphase chromosomes and chromosome scaffolds. J. Cell Biol. 96, 84–93.

11. Cremer, T., and Cremer, M. (2010). Chromosome territories. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2, a003889.

32. Paturej, J., Sheiko, S.S., Panyukov, S., and Rubinstein, M. (2016). Molecular structure of bottlebrush polymers in melts. Sci. Adv. 2, e1601478.

12. Haaf, T., and Schmid, M. (1991). Chromosome topology in mammalian interphase nuclei. Exp. Cell Res. 192, 325–332.

33. Pienta, K.J., and Coffey, D.S. (1984). A structural analysis of the role of the nuclear matrix and dna loops in the organization of the nucleus and chromosome. J. Cell Sci. Suppl. 1984, 123–135.

13. Manders, E.M., Kimura, H., and Cook, P.R. (1999). Direct imaging of dna in living cells reveals the dynamics of chromosome formation. J. Cell Biol. 144, 813–821. 14. Marko, J.F. (2008). Micromechanical studies of mitotic chromosomes. Chromosome Res. 16, 469–497. 15. Marsden, M.P., and Laemmli, U.K. (1979). Metaphase chromosome structure: evidence for a radial loop model. Cell 17, 849–858. 16. Naumova, N., Imakaev, M., Fudenberg, G., Zhan, Y., Lajoie, B.R., Mirny, L.A., and Dekker, J. (2013). Organization of the mitotic chromosome. Science 342, 948–953. 17. Paulson, J.R., and Laemmli, U.K. (1977). The structure of histone-depleted metaphase chromosomes. Cell 12, 817–828. 18. Yokota, H., Van Den Engh, G., Hearst, J.E., Sachs, R.K., and Trask, B.J. (1995). Evidence for the organization of chromatin in megabase pair-sized loops arranged along a random walk path in the human g0/g1 interphase nucleus. J. Cell Biol. 130, 1239–1249. 19. Paulson, J.R., Hudson, D.F., Cisneros-Soberanis, F., and Earnshaw, W.C. (2021). Mitotic chromosomes. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 117, 7–29. 20. Gibcus, J.H., Samejima, K., Goloborodko, A., Samejima, I., Naumova, N., Nuebler, J., Kanemaki, M.T., Xie, L., Paulson, J.R., Earnshaw, W.C., et al. (2018). A pathway for mitotic chromosome formation. Science 359, eaao6135. 21. Dej, K.J., Ahn, C., and Orr-Weaver, T.L. (2004). Mutations in the drosophila condensin subunit dcap-g: defining the role of condensin for chromosome condensation in mitosis and gene expression in interphase. Genetics 168, 895–906. 22. Gerlich, D., Hirota, T., Koch, B., Peters, J.-M., and Ellenberg, J. (2006). Condensin i stabilizes chromosomes mechanically through a dynamic interaction in live cells. Curr. Biol. 16, 333–344. 23. Green, L.C., Kalitsis, P., Chang, T.M., Cipetic, M., Kim, J.H., Marshall, O., Turnbull, L., Whitchurch, C.B., Vagnarelli, P., Samejima, K., et al. (2012). Contrasting roles of condensin i and condensin ii in mitotic chromosome formation. J. Cell Sci. 125, 1591–1604. 24. Hagstrom, K.A., Holmes, V.F., Cozzarelli, N.R., and Meyer, B.J. (2002). C. elegans condensin promotes mitotic chromosome architecture, centromere organization, and sister chromatid segregation during mitosis and meiosis. Genes Dev. 16, 729–742. 25. Hirano, T., and Mitchison, T.J. (1994). A heterodimeric coiled-coil protein required for mitotic chromosome condensation in vitro. Cell 79, 449–458.

34. Boy de la Tour, E., and Laemmli, U.K. (1988). The metaphase scaffold is helically folded: sister chromatids have predominantly opposite helical handedness. Cell 55, 937–944. 35. Earnshaw, W.C. (1988). Mitotic chromosome structure. Bioessays 9, 147–150. 36. Kuwada, Y. (1939). Chromosome structure a critical review. Cytologia 10, 213–256. 37. Ohnuki, Y. (1968). Structure of chromosomes. Chromosoma 25, 402–428. 38. Rattner, J.B., and Lin, C.C. (1985). Radial loops and helical coils coexist in metaphase chromosomes. Cell 42, 291–296. 39. Woodcock, C.L., Frado, L.-L., and Rattner, J.B. (1984). The higher-order structure of chromatin: evidence for a helical ribbon arrangement. J. Cell Biol. 99, 42–52. 40. Chu, L., Liang, Z., Mukhina, M., Fisher, J., Vincenten, N., Zhang, Z., Hutchinson, J., Zickler, D., and Kleckner, N. (2020). The 3d topography of mitotic chromosomes. Mol. Cell 79, 902–916.e6. 41. Ganji, M., Shaltiel, I.A., Bisht, S., Kim, E., Kalichava, A., Haering, C.H., and Dekker, C. (2018). Real-time imaging of dna loop extrusion by condensin. Science 360, 102–105. 42. Kong, M., Cutts, E.E., Pan, D., Beuron, F., Kaliyappan, T., Xue, C., Morris, E.P., Musacchio, A., Vannini, A., and Greene, E.C. (2020). Human condensin i and ii drive extensive atp-dependent compaction of nucleosomebound dna. Mol. Cell 79, 99–114.e9. 43. Takaki, R., Dey, A., Shi, G., and Thirumalai, D. (2021). Theory and simulations of condensin mediated loop extrusion in dna. Nat. Commun. 12, 1–10. 44. Bryngelson, J., and Thirumalai, D. (1996). Internal constraints induce localization in an isolated polymer molecule. Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 542–545. 45. Rouse, P.E., Jr. (1953). A theory of the linear viscoelastic properties of dilute solutions of coiling polymers. J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1272–1280. 46. Shi, G., and Thirumalai, D. (2019). Conformational heterogeneity in human interphase chromosome organization reconciles the fish and hi-c paradox. Nat. Commun. 10, 1–10. 47. Abramo, K., Valton, A.-L., Venev, S.V., Ozadam, H., Fox, A.N., and Dekker, J. (2019). A chromosome folding intermediate at the condensin-to-cohesin transition during telophase. Nat. Cell Biol. 21, 1393–1402. 48. Shi, G., and Thirumalai, D. (2021). From hi-c contact map to three-dimensional organization of interphase human chromosomes. Phys. Rev. X 11, 011051–011077.

[Page 13]

49. Ryu, J.-K., Katan, A.J., van der Sluis, E.O., Wisse, T., de Groot, R., Haering, C.H., and Dekker, C. (2020). The condensin holocomplex cycles dynamically between open and collapsed states. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27, 1134–1141.

Mitotic chromosomes are compacted laterally by kif4 and condensin and axially by topoisomerase iia. J. Cell Biol. 199, 755–770. 61. Hirano, T. (2016). Condensin-based chromosome organization from bacteria to vertebrates. Cell 164, 847–857.

50. Golfier, S., Quail, T., Kimura, H., and Brugués, J. (2020). Cohesin and condensin extrude dna loops in a cell cycle-dependent manner. Elife 9, e53885.

62. Darwin, C. (1875). The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants (John Murray).

51. Banigan, E.J., and Mirny, L.A. (2020). The interplay between asymmetric and symmetric dna loop extrusion. Elife 9, e63528.

63. Zhang, B., and Wolynes, P.G. (2016). Shape transitions and chiral symmetry breaking in the energy landscape of the mitotic chromosome. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 248101.

52. Hirota, T., Gerlich, D., Koch, B., Ellenberg, J., and Peters, J.-M. (2004). Distinct functions of condensin i and II in mitotic chromosome assembly. J. Cell Sci. 117, 6435–6445. 53. Ono, T., Losada, A., Hirano, M., Myers, M.P., Neuwald, A.F., and Hirano, T. (2003). Differential contributions of condensin i and condensin II to mitotic chromosome architecture in vertebrate cells. Cell 115, 109–121. 54. Ohnuki, Y. (1965). Demonstration of the spiral structure of human chromosomes. Nature 208, 916–917. 55. Goriely, A., and Tabor, M. (1998). Spontaneous helix hand reversal and tendril perversion in climbing plants. Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1564–1567. 56. McMillen, T., and Goriely, A. (2002). Tendril perversion in intrinsically curved rods. J. Nonlinear Sci. 12, 241–281. 57. Moradi, M., Babin, V., Roland, C., Darden, T.A., and Sagui, C. (2009). Conformations and free energy landscapes of polyproline peptides. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 20746–20751. 58. Kapanidis, A.N., Margeat, E., Ho, S.O., Kortkhonjia, E., Weiss, S., and Ebright, R.H. (2006). Initial transcription by rna polymerase proceeds through a dna-scrunching mechanism. Science 314, 1144–1147. 59. Adolph, K., Cheng, S., Paulson, J., and Laemmli, U. (1977). Isolation of a protein scaffold from mitotic hela cell chromosomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 74, 4937–4941. 60. Samejima, K., Samejima, I., Vagnarelli, P., Ogawa, H., Vargiu, G., Kelly, D.A., de Lima Alves, F., Kerr, A., Green, L.C., Hudson, D.F., et al. (2012).

12 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023

64. Humphrey, W., Dalke, A., and Schulten, K. (1996). Vmd – visual molecular dynamics. J. Mol. Graph. 14, 33–38. 65. Eastman, P., Swails, J., Chodera, J.D., McGibbon, R.T., Zhao, Y., Beauchamp, K.A., Wang, L.-P., Simmonett, A.C., Harrigan, M.P., Stern, C.D., et al. (2017). Openmm 7: rapid development of high performance algorithms for molecular dynamics. PLoS Comput. Biol. 13, e1005659. 66. Sanborn, A.L., Rao, S.S.P., Huang, S.-C., Durand, N.C., Huntley, M.H., Jewett, A.I., Bochkov, I.D., Chinnappan, D., Cutkosky, A., Li, J., et al. (2015). Chromatin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in wild-type and engineered genomes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, E6456–E6465. 67. Shi, G., and Thirumalai, D. (2023). A maximum-entropy model to predict 3D structural ensembles of chromatin from pairwise distances with applications to interphase chromosomes and structural variants. Nat. Commun. 14, 1150. 68. Walther, N., Hossain, M.J., Politi, A.Z., Koch, B., Kueblbeck, M., ØdegårdFougner, Ø., Lampe, M., and Ellenberg, J. (2018). A quantitative map of human condensins provides new insights into mitotic chromosome architecture. J. Cell Biol. 217, 2309–2328. 69. Kim, E., Kerssemakers, J., Shaltiel, I.A., Haering, C.H., and Dekker, C. (2020). Dna-loop extruding condensin complexes can traverse one another. Nature 579, 438–442.

[Page 14]

STAR+METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE

REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

Software and algorithms MATLAB

The MathWorks Inc.

MATLAB

VMD

Humphrey et al.64

VMD

OpenMM

Eastman et al.65

OpenMM

HIPPS

Shi and Thirumalai48

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7531310

A-GRMC

This paper

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7686350

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead contact Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dave Thirumalai (dave. thirumalai@gmail.com). Material availability This study did not require or generate any materials or reagents. Data and code availability This theoretical work does not report original data. All original code has been deposited on GitHub. The code to implement the A-GRMC simulation can be accessed at [https://github.com/at-ray-o/LoopExtrusionGRMC]. The code to implement the HIPPS method can be accessed at [https://github.com/anyuzx/HIPPS-DIMES] and is publicly available as of the date of publication. DOIs are listed in the key resources table. Any additional information required to reanalyze or reproduce the work reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request. EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS No experimental models were used in this study. METHOD DETAILS We developed the Active GRMC (A-GRMC) model, which incorporates the collective active dynamics of multiple condensin motors in concert with the GRMC model.44,60The calculations using the A-GRMC are done in two steps. First, we perform kinetic simulations of loop extrusion (LE) driven by multiple condensin motors to determine the genomic location of loop anchors as a function of time. The motors are the anchor points to which the loops are stapled. Second, the dynamics of LE is used in conjunction with the GRMC to generate chromosome structures, which allowed us to calculate PðsÞ that can be compared with experimental data. The technical details are given below and further elaborated in the supplemental information (SI). Loop extrusions (LE) by multiple condensins The model for multi-condensin loop extrusion is shown schematically in Figure 1. Each condensin complex, belonging to the Structural Maintenance Complex, is modeled as a pair of capture points on the DNA. In accord with the scrunching mechanism,43,49 we assume that only one of the capture points (depicted as a circle in Figure 1) moves along the DNA while the other point (depicted as a square) is fixed. In other words, each motor performs one-sided loop extrusion. Condensins disengage from the DNA track stochastically with probability, poff , or load onto DNA with probability pon . The direction of loop extrusion along the DNA is random and the mobile point moves processively (takes many steps before disengaging) along the direction of initial orientation. The A-GRMC kinetic simulations are initiated (t = 0) with no bound condensins. At later times, the movement of the mobile-point is controlled by the value of the stepping probability, Pstep (see supplemental information for details). The values of pon and poff are calculated from number of bound condensins (nb ) and total number of condensins (nt ). These quantities have been measured in experiments (see supplemental information (SI) for details). Kinetic simulations for multi-condensin LE The kinetic simulations for multi-condensin driven LE is performed in four steps (Figure 1): (1) At t = 0 min, the condensin motors are assumed to be in the unbound state. At each time step, individual motor (condensin I or II) binds to the genome with probability pon .

[Page 15]

A bound condensin can also disassociate with probability poff . (2) Once the binding and unbinding events are determined, each newly bound condensin is assigned a random orientation for LE, which is unchanged until the condensin disengages from the genome. (3) A bound condensin takes a single LE step with probability, Pstep , which is set to unity in all the metaphase chromosome calculations, unless specified otherwise. The location of the mobile point after a single LE step is determined by the step size of condensin, which is sampled from the distribution given in the STAR Methods (Equation 4). Results obtained using an alternative step-size distribution is also shown in Figure S1. If the motor encounters another condensin, it pauses (does not take any steps) for a time duration, tp . (4) After executing these events, the clock is advanced by one time-step, and the first three steps are repeated. The parameters in the kinetic simulations, listed in Table S5, are determined using the experimental data. The details are in the STAR Methods. The locations of the condensin heads constitute the scaffold from which loops of various sizes emanate. At each time step, the genome locations of the condensin heads are determined and used in conjunction with GRMC to obtain the chromatin structures. A-GRMC The energy function for A-GRMC (Equation 6 in the STAR Methods) has two terms: (1) the chain connectivity, modeled using harmonic bonds, with a spring constant, k = 3kB T=b2 , where b is the locus size, (2) the looping interaction, which is also modeled using harmonic potentials between the two heads of condensin with the same spring constant, as given above. The dynamics of the loops are determined by the kinetic simulation described above and illustrated in Figure 1. The loop anchors that are pinned by the motors serve as the backbone scaffold for the chromosome. At each time-step in the kinetic simulation, the loop anchors are fixed and their positions are known. Thus, the energy function (Equation 6) is fully determined. Given the energy function, the chromosome structures can be generated (see details in the STAR Methods) from which PðsÞ as a function of s, can be readily calculated (see details in the STAR Methods). Without loss of generality, we use reduced units by setting kB T = 1, and the locus size b = 1, which is on the order of a hundred microns in real units.48 Each coarse-grained monomer in the A-GRMC represents 10 kbp, which is longer than the persistence length of DNA and likely also the chromatin fiber,66 justifying the use of the flexible polymer model without any angle potential (Equation 6). Although the fundamental length scale of the loop-extrusion step is comparable to the persistence length of DNA, the total chromosome length is orders of magnitude larger. Therefore, even though the step-size distribution is calculated using the Equation 4 in the STAR Methods, which is derived for semi-flexible polymers, we model the chromosomes as a generalized Rouse polymer. Hi-C-polymer-physics-structures (HIPPS) To complement the A-GRMC model, we used the HIPPS method,48 whose sole input is the measured contact maps from Hi-C experiments. Because the details of the HIPPS method, including its theoretical basis, and applications are given elsewhere,48,67 here we only provide a brief description. The algorithm implementing HIPPS has three steps: (1) First, the mean contact probability between two loci i and j is used to calculate the average spatial distance between them using polymer physics concepts.48 In practice, we produced smooth contact maps, Ci;j from PðsÞ inferred from the Hi-C experiments. The matrix Ci;j is then transformed to a distance map. (2) The mean distance matrix between all the loci is used as a constraint to construct the probability distribution of the loci coordinates using the maximum entropy principle. The essential equations in the HIPPS calculations are provided in the STAR Methods. The HIPPS method generates an ensemble of 3D coordinates for the loci using experimental Hi-C map without constructing any polymer model. The PðsÞ versus s plots can be readily calculated from the 3D coordinates. Shi and Thirumalai48 showed that the HIPPS method is remarkably successful in predicting the 3D structures of all the 23 interphase chromosomes from GM12878 cells. QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS We did not use standard statistical tests for the analysis. The details of all the quantification and statistical analyses are given below. Estimates of pon and poff The theory for generating the shape of the mitotic chromosomes is based on the model described in Figure 1 in the main text. Two key parameters needed for the simulation of the Active-Generalized Rouse Model for Chromosomes (A-GRMC) are, pon and poff , which are the probabilities that condensin motors bind and unbind from DNA, respectively. We calculated pon and poff using data from Fluorescence Recovery After Photo (FRAP) experiments68 for the residence times of condensin I and II bound to chromosomes. Since the mechanisms of the binding-unbinding processes are unknown, we assume that they obey first order kinetics. We assumed that at each step in the simulations condensin binds or unbinds with probability pon and poff , respectively. The average time (in units of the a time step = 1 s - see the next section for an explanation) a single condensin stays bound to a chromosome is, CtB D =

t=1

ðt 1Þ

t $ poff $ ð1 poff Þ

=

: poff

Since the number of bound (nb ) and unbound (nu ) condensin molecules is relatively constant during mitosis,68 we assume that they are in equilibrium with each other. Given that the total number of condensins nt = nb + nu , consequently at equilibirum,

14 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023

[Page 16]

nu $ pon = nb $poff 0pon =

nb $poff : nu

Using the data in Tables S1 and S2, we calculated nt for both the condensin motors.68 used diploid HeLa cells whose genome size is N = 2 x 7:9 Gbp. Assuming uniform coverage of condensins in 100 Mbps of DNA, nt = 403; 395$100$106 =ð2 $7:9 $109 Þz 2553 for condensin I and for 100 Mbp of DNA nt = 54; 219$100$106 =ð2 $7:9 $109 Þz343 Condensin II. Because nb for condensin I varies during mitosis, we used the highest value of nb which is formed during prometaphase (shown in Table S3). Thus, for a 100 Mbps DNA nb = 190433$100$106 =ð2 $7:9 $109 Þz1205 for condensin I. The total number of condensin II molecules remain relatively constant, so we used the average number from Table S4, which leads to nb = 33180$100$106 =ð2 $7:9 $109 Þz210. We used the average value of bound time Ct B D = 120 s, for condensin I and CtB D = 360 s, for condensin II. The use of average values did not significantly change any of the results. Using these values in Equation 1 and 2, we calculated pon and poff for condensin I and II. The parameters, listed in the Table S5 in the supplemental information, show that pon and poff are different for condensin I and II. All the six parameters needed in the A-GRMC simulations are obtained from experiments. It is in this sense that we consider the A-GRMC simulations to be free of parameters. We also varied some of the parameters (t P , the pausing time when two motors collide, tB , the mean life time of the motors bound to chromatin, and pon and poff ) in order to assess their effect on PðsÞ as a function of the genomic distance, s. The results are shown in Figure S4. The parameters used for the A-GRMC calculation are given in Table S5. Calculation of the number of steps per second In an earlier study,43 we calculated the step-size distribution, PðLjRÞ, for loop-extrusion by assuming that a condensin of length R captures a loop with contour length L. The distribution, PðLjRÞ is given by, ! 2 4pNfLgðR=LÞ 3tfLg ; PðLjRÞ = C 9=2 exp 4 1 ðR=LÞ2 L 1 ðR=LÞ2 3=2 a

where tfLg = 3L=2lp with lp = 50 nm is the persistence length of the DNA, and NfLg = p3=2 ð4 + 4a with afLg = 3t= 4. The 12a 1 + 15a 2 Þ

normalization constant C is independent of L. The distribution PðLjRÞ does not have a well-defined mean and variance. Moreover, the Cumulative Density Function (CDF) of PðLjRÞ cannot be easily calculated, which makes it difficult to sample PðLjRÞ in simulations. Therefore, we numerically discretized PðLjRÞ from 0 % L % 100; 000 nm. We sampled the discretized distribution by linearly interpolating between adjacent points in the CDF. By using PðLjRÞ, we calculated the number of steps per second required to achieve a loop extrusion (LE) rate of 1; 500bp= s, which is the measured value in single molecule experiments at small external loads. In the experiment41 the LE rate = 1; 500bp=s corresponds to 0.3 relative DNA extension. In their paper, the relative extension is defined as the length between the tethers at either end of the DNA divided by the length of unextruded DNA. From Figure 3 in,41 the length between the tethers is z4mm. Thus, for 4 = 13:33mm. Given the length of the l DNA in the experiment 0.3 relative extension, the length of the DNA that is not extruded is 0:3 is 20mm, the length of the loop is ð20 13:33Þmmz6:7mm. We found it takes z9:63 steps using Equation 3, to extrude a loop of length 6:7mm, implying each step extrudes a loop with length 6:7=9:63z0:695mm. Then, using an LE rate of z1500 bp/s, and assuming that the average distance between two base-pairs is 0.34 nm, we obtain the stepping rate of condensin as 1500 x 0:34 x 10 3 =ð0:695mmÞz0:73z1 step/second. The step size L is chosen from the distribution Equation 4, where R, the size of condensin, which we take to be 40 nm43. We assume that when Pstep = 1, both condensin I and II take one step per second to match the measured 1,500 bp/s LE velocity.41 In most of the paper, we set PStep = 1 and only modulate it to reproduce the experimental PðsÞ for times, t = 7:5; 10; 15; 30 minutes, as the DT40 cell cycle progress. Following an experimental study,69 we assume that when there is a collision between different condensin sites on the chromatin (either mobile or fixed), the loop-extrusion is paused for tP z7 s. We also varied t P to ascertain the impact on PðsÞ (see Figure S4). After t P , the mobile sites are allowed to move through the blocks. In the LE simulations, the chromosome is modeled as a linear track with 100 bp resolution, which is less than the canonical value of the DNA persistence length. On this length scale, DNA is best described as a semi-flexible polymer, making it necessary to use the step-size distribution given in Equation 4. The time-resolution in the simulation is 1 s, and the LE simulations are performed for about 60 min. PðsÞ is captured using rouse model The agreement between the theoretical (A-GRMC) and experimental PðsÞ is not sensitive to the exact nature of PðLjRÞ. As shown in Figure S1, instead of using Equation 3, we used the PðLjRÞ derived from PðRjLÞ where PðRjLÞ which for a Rouse Chain with length L and monomer size b has the following form, 3=2

3R2 ; exp P LjR = C$4pR2 2p$L$b 2$L$b

[Page 17]

qffiffiffiffi o 1 = 1 Erf 3R (Figure S1A), where ErfðxÞ is the error function. Interestingly, the shape of the PðsÞ curve obtained where C = 6R 2b using Equation 4 is similar to the one obtained with the one obtained using Equation 3. Calculations of contact map and structures using A-GRMC Contact map We first derive an expression for the contact map for a particular choice of loop anchors (the trace of the condensin motors) specified by L. Let ri = ðxi ; yi ; zi Þ be the position of the ith locus. The GRMC energy function associated with the loop conformation is,44,48 H =

nðLÞ 1 1 2 k NX k X ðri + 1 ri Þ2 + rLða + 1Þ rLðaÞ ; 2 i=1 2 a=1

where, LðaÞ represents the ath loop. The harmonic nature of the GRMC energy function makes it separable, H = Hx + Hy + Hz , where P 1 2 k PnðLÞ 1 2 1 T Hx = 2k N i = 1 ðxi + 1 xi Þ + 2 a = 1 ðxLða + 1Þ xLðaÞ Þ , which in matrix notation is, Hx = 2x Ax. The elements, Aij , are given by, 8 if i = j = 1 or N; qi = 1 if i ̨ L and qi = 0 otherwise k + qi k; > > > > if i = js1 or N; qi = 1 if i ̨ L and qi = 0 otherwise < 2k + 2qi k; Aij = k; if ji jj = 1 > > k; if i = Lða 1Þ and j = LðaÞ; or i = Lða + 1Þ and j = LðaÞ > > : 0; otherwise In the first two terms of the above equation, qi is 1 when i is a loop-base, and is 0 otherwise. The distribution function is given by, JðrN Þ = JðxN ÞJðyN ÞJðzN Þfexp

1 Hx + Hy + Hz : kB T

The property of the multivariate Gaussian distributions allows us to write, JðxN Þfexp

1 T x Ax : 2kB T

The matrix A cannot be inverted because it is not translationally invariant, which is easily resolved by fixing the first monomer at the ~ ij such that, origin with the spring constant k. This modifies A, and we can define the matrix A ~ ij =

A11 k Aij ;

For all other i or j

~ 1 . Thus, the equilibrium probability distribution of the x-coordinates is a The covariance matrix is the inverse, S = A normal distribution, ~ JðxN Þ N ð0; SÞ. The distribution of the distance along the x axis between each pair of monomers may be written as,

Pðxi xj = xÞ N 0; s2ij ; where s2ij = Sii + Sjj 2Sij . Our earlier study46 showed that the distance distribution between the ith and the jth monomer is given by, rffiffiffiffi 2 1 r 2 2s2ij r 2 : Pð rij = rÞ = p sij s2ij The contact probability between i and j loci is obtained by integrating Equation 12 till a cutoff distance, rc , which yields, Z rc rffiffiffiffi 2 1 r 2 2s2ij r 2 dr Pij = p sij s2ij 0

rc = Erf pffiffiffi 2sij

!

rffiffiffi 2 rc2 2s2ij rc :

sij

We used rc = b. By repeating this calculation for all the i and j pairs gives us the contact probabilities for each pair of loci for a given set, L of loop-bases. Practical implementation The procedure for the calculation of the loop size and the coordinates of the monomers in the loop are best explained using a single where Dt = 1s. At each time step a loop between the locus i and i + k on DNA in time T. The total number of steps taken is Nstep = Dt

16 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023

[Page 18]

loop of length, lj , which is sampled using Equation 4 with R = 40nm, is extruded. The loop length (in units of 10 kbps) is k =

lj where

j goes from 1 to Nstep . In order to compute the coordinates of all the loci between i and i + k, we first calculated the connectivity-matrix A given in Equation 7. The quadratic nature of the energy function associated with the A-GRMC enables us to compute the normal modes of the system. Each coordinate (i;ði + 1Þ;/ði + kÞ) is a linear combination of the normal modes. We write A as A = UT $D$U, where D is a diagonal matrix, and U is the eigenvector of A. Furthermore, we can write A = UT $D1=2 $I$D1=2 $U, where I is an identity matrix. Equation 9 can now be rewritten as JðxN Þfexp

1 T l Il ; 2kB T

where l = ðD1=2 $U $xÞ. Since I is the identity matrix Equation 15 can be separated into N independent N ð0; 1Þ distributions. These are the distributions of the normal mode vectors. We sample each normal mode vector separately from N ð0; 1Þ and use x = ðD1=2 $UÞ 1 $l to generate the coordinates of the loci in the loop connecting i and i + k. The same process is repeated for the y and z coordinates. Calculation of pðsÞ A contact map is constructed by computing Pij for every pair of i;j. The final average CM is computed by averaging over 500 different realizations of loops. From the average CM the probability of contact between two loci separated by a genomic length s, PðsÞ was computed using, PðsÞ =

ns 1 X Ci;i + s ; n s i=1

where Ci;i + s is the contact frequency between the ith and ði + sÞth loci, and the genomic distance s is measured in units of 10 kbps. To compare between experimental and calculated PðsÞ versus s, we computed the mean-squared error (s2 ) between the two PðsÞ curves in the log scale. This is given by, s2 =

smax h 1 X

smax s = 0

i2 log PðsÞexp log PðsÞGRMC :

A small value of s2 implies good agreement between the two PðsÞ curves. Contact maps (CMs) generated using A-GRMC simulations are shown in Figure S7A. Just like in experiments,41 mitotic contact maps are featureless. As a result, there is little distinction between CMs obtained in the presence of only condensin I or condensin II. The only discernible difference is the darker color at the corner of condensin I contact map, which suggests that the contact frequency is smaller. It appears that PðsÞ is a better metric to visually observe the differences in the contact frequencies. Pstep variation When Pstep = 1 condensin molecules extrude loops at every timestep. If Pstep is not unity, a step is taken if a random number drawn between 1⁄20; 1 is less than Pstep . As explained in the main text, by varying Pstep , we obtain better agreement with experiments for PðsÞ for both condensin I/II depleted chromosomes at different time points (Figure 5). Figure S7B also shows that the same optimal Pstep values for condensin I/II chromosomes could be used even when both types of motors are simultaneously present. HIPPS calculations The theoretical basis for the HIPPS method48 is rooted in the power law that relates the contact probability Pij and the average distance Crij D between loci i and j. The exact relationship between Pij and Crij D is, 1=a

Crij D = LPij

;

where we use L = 1:0 and a = 3:0 for the mitotic chromosomes. The objective is to calculate the joint distribution of the 3D coordinates of the loci, Pðxi Þ, subject to the constraint that the mean pairwise distance is Cðxi xj Þ2 D = Crij2 D. Since there are potentially an infinite number of Pðxi Þ distributions that could give the same average pairwise distances, we use the maximum entropy principle to obtain a unique distribution. The maximum entropy distribution, PMaxEnt ðxi Þ, subject to the constraints associated with the mean squared pairwise spatial distances is given by, ! PMaxEnt ðxi Þ = exp kij kxi xj k2 : i<j

The kij values are obtained by an optimization procedure. We calculate kij using an iterative procedure.48 Let kij ðtÞ be the value of kij at the tth iteration. The update is done as,

[Page 19]

Crij2 ðtÞD ln 2 ; Crij D i < j rij ðtÞ

kij ðt + 1Þ = kij ðtÞ + P

where r is the learning rate. Full details of the calculation maybe found elsewhere.48 Assessing the handedness of mitotic structures In an effort to understand the helical nature of the mitotic chromosomes, we first computed CðsÞ for synthetically generated structures. We created helices with 100 Mbps of mitotic chromsomes at 100 Kbps resolution (1; 000 loci). The period of the helix (p) is the contour length along the helix needed to complete one turn. This corresponds to the first peak in the CðsÞ curve (see Figure 7 in the main text). For the synthetic helices, we used a period of 1 Mbps. In order to elucidate the nature of helix perversion, we introduced a randomness parameter (r) that controls the probability with which the helix changes the handedness. In Figure S5A we show the structures of the helices for different r values. An ideal helix with a definite handedness through out the length of the mitotic chromosome corresponds to r = 0. The CðsÞ for an ideal helix is perfectly periodic (Figure S5B), which is not found in the CðsÞ calculated using the 3D HIPPS-generated structures (see Figure 7B in the main text). Moreover, CðsÞ for a structures with Periodic Helix Perversion (PHP), is also periodic (see the purple curve in Figure S5B), and inconsistent with the results in Figure 7B in the main text. In contrast, for rs0 (in particular for r = 0:04) the CðsÞ obtained from the synthetic structures resembles the one calculated for condensin I depleted DT40 cells at t = 30min (see Figure S5B in the main text), providing the first hint that helix perversion could occur randomly. The qualitative agreement between CðsÞ calculated using the synthetic and HIPPS-generated structures for rs0 suggests that mitotic chromosomes could also have alternating handedness, which was noted recently.40 To further quantify the handedness of chromosomes, we used the local helical parameters (c) introduced by Moradi et al.57 In Figure S6A, we show the geometric construction for calculating c. The c parameter depends on the period of the helix. For a helix with ! ! period p, AB and CD are the vectors between the ith and ði + p=2Þth centers, and ði + p=4Þth and ði + 3p=4Þth centers, respectively. The ! ! ! ! vector EF connects the midpoints of AB and CD . Using these vectors, c is defined as the dot product of the unit vector along EF with ! ! the unit vector along AB 3 CD . We computed c along the whole structure for different values of i. For an ideal right handed helix, the ! ! ! distribution of c is peaked at 1. Conversely for an ideal left handed helix AB 3CD will always point away from EF , and the distribution of c is peaked at 1. We computed c for the structures with r = 0:01 and r = 0:04 (Figures S6C and S6D). The distribution of c for r = 0:01 has peaks at 1 and 1 in addition to 0. This implies that there are both left and right handed helices. At r = 0:04, which produces CðsÞ that resembles the one shown in Figure 7A in the main text using 3D structures, the peaks at 1 and 1 are lost. The distribution peaks at c = 0. At r = 0:04 the CðsÞ graphs shows evidence of periodicity, but the helix is neither left or right handed but is a mixture of the two. This would correspond to helix perversion with the handedness switching randomly across the structure. Finally, we calculated the distribution of c using the 1; 000 structures calculated from HIPPS in condensin II chromosomes at t = 30 min (Figure S6E). For these calculations, we used the period p = 9:9 Mbps, corresponding to the first peak in the CðsÞ curve (Figure 7A in the main text). The HIPPS calculations suggest that the entire ensemble of chromosomes could consist of a mixture of left and right handed helices, which is consistent with the conclusions reached previously.63 When we plot the distribution of c for a single HIPPS structure in condensin II chromosomes at t = 30 min (Figure S6F), we find that there is a modest bias toward c < 0. This particular structure has hints of being slightly left handed. Thus, mitotic chromosomes in general could have alternating handedness in a single structure, with possible bias toward helices with either handedness.

18 Cell Reports 42, 112348, April 25, 2023
