[Page 1]

RESEARCH ARTICLE | AUGUST 01 1969

Limiting Laws and Counterion Condensation in Polyelectrolyte Solutions I. Colligative Properties  Special Collection: JCP 90 for 90 Anniversary Collection

Gerald S. Manning

J. Chem. Phys. 51, 924–933 (1969) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1672157

  View Online

Export Citation

Articles You May Be Interested In Online application of colligative properties solutions experiment AIP Conf. Proc. (March 2023)

Project based online learning on the concept of the colligative properties of solutions AIP Conf. Proc. (March 2023)

Student misconception analysis on the concept of colligative properties of solutions using a digital threeAIP Conference Proceedings (March 2021)

tier multiple-choice diagnostic test

[Page 2]

THE JOURNAL OF CHEMICAL PHYSICS

VOLUME 51, NUMBER 3

1 AUGUST 1969

Limiting Laws and Counterion Condensation in Polyelectrolyte Solutions I. Colligative Properties GERALD S. MANNING* The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021 (Received 10 March 1969)

Formulas are derived for the osmotic coefficient, the Donnan salt-exclusion factor, and the mobile-ion activity coefficients in a polyelectrolyte solution with or without added sample salt. The formulas, which contain no adjustable parameters, are based on the (theoretical) observation by several workers that counterions will "condense" on the polyion until the charge density on the polyion is reduced below a certain critical value. The uncondensed mobile ions are treated in the Debye-Hiickel approximation. In a restricted sense, the formulas are "limiting laws," and this aspect is discussed at length. Detailed comparison with experimental data in the literature is given; agreement of the theory with experiment is usually found to be quantitative.

I. INTRODUCTION

* Present address: School of Chemistry, Rutgers, The State University, New Brunswick, ~ew Jersey.

II. SPECIFICATION OF THE MODEL

It must first be recognized that, strictly speaking, the Debye-Htickel limiting law is as valid for a polyelectrolyte solution as for any other ionic solution. Thus, in general, if a solution contains (J' species of ions with concentrations (number of ions per cc) nJ, " ' , n~ and valences Zl,"', Z~, then the excess (electrostatic) Helmholtz free energy Fex of the solution at sufficiently low concentrations is given by the limiting law1 ,2

Fex

- - =-

VkT

(41re2 ~ )3 /2(1271')-1, - - 2: nizi

€kT i=1

1 R. Fowler and E. A. Guggenheim, Statistical Thermodynamics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1960). 2 J. E. Mayer, J. Chern. Phys. 18, 1426 (1950).

Workers who study the properties of polyelectrolyte solutions have long been at a disavantage vis Ii 7'is their colleagues in the field of simple ionic solutions, for the latter have had, for several decades now, the availability of a theory which is generally accepted to be exact-the Debye-Htickellimiting law. Thus, all measurements at finite concentrations can be extrapolated with confidence into very dilute regions and may be referred to as "deviations from the limiting law." All such deviations may then be attributed to effects not taken into account in the derivation of the limiting law (short-range interionic forces, molecular nature of the solvent, etc.), and theories concerning such effects may then be attempted. On the contrary, no such "reference point" has been available to polyelectrolyte chemists. The high charge density on the polyion implies that many counterions will be attracted to its immediate neighborhood at all concentrations for which measurements can be made. Even at low equivalent concentrations, therefore, the problem is one of concentrated solutions for which a limiting law is not anticipated. For that reason, experimentalists have given equal emphasis to all convenient concentration ranges, while theoreticians have tried to "fit the data" over the entire range of concentration. In practice, the result has been the introduction of adjustable parameters such as effective dielectric constants, mass-action binding constants, polyion size parameters, and effective poly ion charge densities (the author has contributed his share), without, however, any really clear idea of what the "ideal" values of such parameters should be, or under what conditions the ideal values would be applicable. For example, while it is obvious that the dielectric constant which appears in the Debye-Htickel limiting law is that which governs the interaction of point charges at large separations, namely, the bulk dielectric constant of the pure solvent, it has not at all been clear that the bulk dielectric constant of water has any relation whatever to the observed

beha.vior of aqueous polyelectrolyte solutions. Again, for a very dilute solution of sodium chloride, the size and shape of the ions is irrelevant; it is sufficient to specify the valence of each ion. For a solution of sodium polyphosphate, however, it is important to know not only the "valence" of the polyphosphate ion (there are usually of the order of a thousand charged groups on each polyion), but the spatial distribution of the charges on the polyphosphate, that is, the charge density. The choice of a charge-density parameter is not obvious on a priori grounds. It is the purpose of this communication to construct a series of plausible and well-motivated assumptions which lead to formulas for several colligative properties of polyelectrolyte solutions. The formulas may be thought of as "limiting laws" in the sense that they are designed specifically for solutions of low equivalent concentration; the number of parameters is thereby reduced to an absolute minimum. Moreover, the numerical values of the parameters are fixed by the assumptions and do not depend in any way on empirical results. Although the formulas are probably not of the same kind of general validity as the Debye-Htickel limiting law, it is hoped that they will serve a similar purpose: to distinguish clearly those effects which dominate at low concentrations from effects which become prominent only with increasing concentration.

[Page 3]

POLYELECTROLYTE

where

b=LjP.

The above discussion leads naturally to the following model: (A) The real polyelectrolyte chain is replaced by an infinite line charge with density (3 given by Eqs. (2) and

It should be emphasized that {3 may not be treated as an adjustable parameter, for the only value consistent with the model of a line charge is that given by Eqs. (2) and (3) and is calculable from the known structure of the particular polyelectrolyte under study. Cylindrically

symmetric models have been previously used by many authors,3-12 usually with the additional specification of a distance of closest approach (formulated as a cylinder of finite radius with uniform surface charge density). Since this communication deals only with limiting laws, such specification will not be necessary. When a simple salt, e.g., sodium chloride, is present in excess over the equivalent polyelectrolyte concentration, one may rigorously neglect electrostatic interactions between polyions in comparison to interactions between a polyion and mobile ions in its vicinity; such, however, is not the case in salt-free solutions. 9 Nevertheless, it has been assumed above that local segments of a polyion are screened from other segments on the same polyion, and it is only consistent to assume that segments on different polyions are likewise screened from each other. Thus, (B) interactions between two or more polyions are neglected regardless of the ratio of polyelectrolyte concentration to that of added simple salt.

In common with nearly all other theories of ionic solutions, the solvent will be regarded as a continuum with a uniform dielectric constant e. It is stated at the outset that (C) the dielectric constant E is taken as that of the pure bulk solvent.

In the context of the present article, justification of this assumption is primarily that it will lead to results which agree with experiment. It is, in fact, possible to understand on physical grounds why the local structure of the solvent in the immediate vicinity of the polyion chain does not affect colligative properties at low equivalent concentrations; an approach other than the present one is needed, however, and will be the subject of a future publication in this series. The next two assumptions are not familiar and require detailed discussion. Onsager13 has observed that the statistical-mechanical phase integral for an infinite line-charge model diverges for all values of {3 greater than a critical value. This phenomenon is easily verified. If p denotes distance from the line charge, then the electrostatic energy of a mobile ion (considered as a 3T. Alfrey, P. W. Berg, and H. Morawetz, J. Polymer Sci. 7, 543 (1951). 4 R. M. Fuoss, A. Katchalsky, and S. Lifson, Proc. Nat!. Acad. Sci. U.S. 37, 579 (1951). 5 S. Lifson and A. Katchalsky, J. Polymer Sci. 13,43 (1954). 6 F. Oosawa, J. Polymer Sci. 23, 421 (1957). 7 u. P. Strauss, J. Am. Chern. Soc. 80, 6498 (1958). 8 L. Kotin and M. Nagasawa, J. Chern. Phys. 36, 873 (1962). 9 G. S. Manning and B. H. Zimm, J. Chern. Phys. 43, 4250 10 A. Katchalsky, Z. Alexandrowicz, and O. Kedem, in Chemical Physics of Ionic Solutions, B. E. Conway and R. G. Barradas, Eds. (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1966), p. 295. 11 L. M. Gross and U. P. Strauss, in Chemical Physics of Ionic Solutions, B. E. Conway and R. G. Barradas, Eds. (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1966), p. 347. 12 A. D. MacGillivray, J. Chern. Phys. 45, 2184 (1966). 13 L. Onsager (informal discussion).

where V is the volume, e the protonic charge, and t the dielectric constant of the pure solvent. If the oth species happens to be a polyion bearing a thousand charged groups, one may still assert that, with I Zu I = 1000, Eq. (1) will be valid at sufficiently low concentrations. The catch is that for a polyelectrolyte solution, "sufficiently low" turns out to be lower than the minimum concentration required for accurate measurements. For long, densely charged polyelectrolytes (polyphosphate, polyacrylate, DNA, etc.), Debye-Htickel limiting behavior has never been observed at the lowest experimentally feasible concentrations; in particular, colligative properties are invariably found to be independent of molecular weight (i.e., of polyion valence) over the entire concentration range studied. Such behavior is not unexpected if one considers that interactions of small ions (mobile ions) with the polyelectrolyte chain will be governed primarily by the charged groups on relatively short segments of the chain, contributions from distant groups being screened at the concentrations used. It is thus possible to regard the chain as being infinitely long, at least insofar as interactions of mobile ions with the chain are concerned. Moreover, local chain segments will have a structure determined largely by the electrostatic repulsion of the charged groups and hence will be approximately in a configuration of maximum extension with cylindrical symmetry. Since mobile ions in the vicinity of one segment are screened from charged groups in other segments, the entire (infinitely long) chain may be considered to be in its unique configuration of maximum extension. It is, furthermore, reasonable to assume that the interactions of the polyion with mobile ions will be primarily dependent on the over-all charge density along the chain, with the discrete nature of the charged groups being a secondary effect ("discrete-charge" effect). Thus, if the contour length of the polyelectrolyte (end-to-end distance in the state of maximum extension) is L, and if the chain bears P charged groups of valence Zp, a uniform linear charge density {3 is assigned to the chain, given by

SOLUTIONS.

[Page 4]

GERALD S. MANNING

point charge) of valence Zi for sufficiently small values of p, say for p~po, is given by the unscreened Coulomb interaction, Uip=-Zie(2(3/e) lnp,

p~PO.

The contribution Ai(pO) to the phase integral of the region in which mobile ion i is within a distance Po of the line charge, while all other mobile ions are at a distance greater than Po, thereby contributing a finite factor !(Po) , is given by

to

(u.'ZT(p)) 27r P dp

A i(pO) = !(po) J0 exp -

where

Eq. (2) for (3 having been used. If ion i is a counterion, so that ZiZp<O, the integral in Eq. (5) diverges at the lower limit for all ~ such that

Attention will be restricted in the following to monovalent charged groups and mobile ions, so the condition (7) becomes

For water at 25°C (e=78.5), the critical value ~=1 corresponds to the charge spacing b = 7.135 A. It will be recognized that the quantity (e2/ ekT) is the "B jerrum length" of the classical theory of simple electrolyte solutionsl; the critical charge spacing is therefore equal to the Bjerrum length. The physical interpretation of the divergence of the phase integral for values of ~ greater than unity is that systems characterized by such values are unstable: sufficiently many counterions will "condense" on the line charge to reduce ~ to a value just less than one. Although the argument presented is valid at arbitrary concentrations for an infinitely thin line charge, it will be shown in a future article that for a more realistic model with a finite distance of closest approach, the instability condition (8) is valid only in the limit of zero concentration; the instability is a "limiting law." The assumption, then, is as follows: (D) For dilute solutions, sufficiently many counterions will "condense" on the polyion to lower the charge-density parameter ~ to the value one.

The critical nature of the point ~ = 1 has in fact been noted previously by a number of authors, but not from as fundamental a point of view as Onsager's. From their detailed analyses of the Poisson-Boltzmann equation as applied to various problems involving rodlike

(E) The uncondensed mobile ions may be treated in the Debye-Hiickel approximation.

In support of this assumption it may be noted that MacGillivrayl2 has demonstrated, from both an analytical and numerical study of the cylindrically symmetric Poisson-Boltzmann equation, that the solution of the linearized equation is a good approximation to the solution of the complete equation for all values of ~< 1. His result is by no means trivial since for dilute solutions, Cl/t/kT»l at the distance of closest approach, where if; is the electrostatic potential. Second, from a purely numerical solution of the Poisson-Boltzmann equation Gross and Straussll derived the following expressions for r, the Donnan salt-exclusion factor, cf. Eq. (30): lim r=HI-H),

(9a)

(9b)

n,,'-O

The limit refers to the concentration of salt in the external compartment. As will be seen in Sec. III, the expression (9a) is precisely that obtained from the Debye-Huckel approximation. Finally, Lifson and 14 N. Irnai and T. Onishi, J. Chern. Phys. 30, 1115 (959). T. Onishi, N. Irnai and F. Oosawa, J. Phys. Soc. Japan 15, 896 (1960); N. Irnai, ibid. 16, 746 (1961). 16 J. L. Jackson and S. R. Coriell, J. Chern. Phys. 40, 1460

charges, Imai, Onishi, and Oosawal4 deduced the special significance of the condition ~ = 1 and, indeed, the terminology "counterion condensation" is to be attributed to them. (I have chosen "condensation" over "binding" primarily because the latter term means so many different things to so many different people.) Jackson and Coriell,15 while studying the Browian motion of a counterion in the neighborhood of a line charge, found the onset of "trapped trajectories" at ~ = 1 and speculated about their relation to the concept of "ion association." As long ago as 1951, Fuo'>s, Katchalsky, and Lifson4 noted that their exact solution of the cylindrically symmetric Poisson-Boltzmann equation in salt-free solutions exhibited qualitatively different behavior for small values of ~ than for large values; although, being interested in the case of a cylinder with finite radius and finite concentrations, they did not emphasize the transition point ~= 1. Gross and Straussll and Mac Gillivray12 also noticed the importance of the condition ~ = 1; their contribution will , be discussed in the context of the next assumption. The uncondensed mobile ions are still subject to electrostatic interactions with the line charge since the charge density of the line after condensation is not zero: if the value of ~ before condensation is greater than one, the value after condensation is equal to one; if it is less than one, there is no condensation and all mobile ions are subject to the full charge density of the line. It is now assumed that:

[Page 5]

POLYELECTROLYTE SOLUTIONS. I

Katchalsky 5 calculated the osmotic coefficient CPP of a salt-free polyelectrolyte solution from an exact analytical solution of the appropriate Poisson-Boltzmann equation. Their result, when applied to the limit as ne, the equivalent polyelectrolyte concentration, tends to zero, is (lOa)

with the segment dz of the line charge, that is, the free energy attributable to interactions between the segment and mobile ions, may be obtained by "charging" the segment up to the charge (3dz starting from zero charge. This procedure amounts to the integration of Eq. (15) from {3=0 to the final value {3: ( 16)

ne~O

(lOb)

Again, it will be shown in Sec. III that (lOa), the expression for ~< 1, is the same as that given by the Debye-Huckel approximation. The analogy of the last two assumptions to the Bjerrum theory of simple electrolytes1 is striking. All deviations from Debye-Huckel behavior are attributed to counterion condensation (ion pairs for simple electrolytes). Bjerrum calculated the extent of pairing from the partition function of an ion pair; the extent of condensation has also been determined here from the partition function (phase integral). Moreover, the Bjerrum length (e 2/ekT) turns out to be central to both theories. III. THE CASE ~ < 1

_1

~ if;(p) - e

2{3

=-

-co

(ex p [-K(p2+ Z2)l/2J) ~ ( p2+ Z2)1/2 d"

foo exp( - Kpt) dt

(t2-1) 1/2

= (2{3je) KO(KP),

( 11)

where the integral in the second line has been noted to be a representation of Ko( Kp), the zeroth-order modified Bessel function of the second kind. If two species 1 and 2 of monovalent mobile ions are present, the Debye screening parameter K is given by

with

Kp---+O,

Fex/VkT=-~nelnK,

so that, when p is allowed to tend to zero in Eq. (11), the potential if;' (0) at the position of the line charge due to the mobile ions is seen to be the term proportional to lnp is the potential due to the line charge itself. The excess free energy jexdz associated

where the definition (6) of ~ has been used, and b-1

L:

dz

has been given the obvious interpretation as the number P of charged groups on each polyion; the equivalent concentration n. is then ( 18)

Equation (17) is the desired Debye-Huckel approximation to the excess free energy for ~ < 1. The problem of units raised by the appearance of the factor InK is only apparent, for all measurable quantities to be calculated from Eq. (17) will have proper units. Actually only part of the excess free energy is given by Eq. (17) since the charging procedure was not applied to the charge on the mobile ions. The contribution of mobile ions may be shown9 to be of higher order in K and is neglected here. Having obtained an expression for the excess Helmholtz free energy, one may easily derive deviations from ideality of various colligative properties. Thus, with the derivatives

i=1,2,

the activity coefficients of the mobile ions follow as

._ Ill"Y,-

(a (pex/VkT) ) ani

T,V,njr'i

i=1,2;~<1.

The function KO(Kp) has the asymptotic behavior KO(Kp)"-'- InKp,

where N p is the number of polyions in the solution so that, when Eq. (2) is used for {3 (with I Zp I = 1) ,

It is useful to write this equation in another form. If Species 1 is the counterion, then

where n. is the concentration of uni-univalent salt added to the polyelectrolyte solution; while for Species 2, the co-ion

According to Assumption (E) of the preceding section, the case ~< 1 may be treated in the DebyeHuckel approximation. The potential if;(p) at a distance p from the line charge (taken along the z axis) is thus given by a superposition of screened Coulomb potentials from infinitesimal segments of length dz:

The total excess free energy Fex of the solution of volume V is set equal to

[Page 6]

GERALD S.

With the use of Eq. (12) and the quantity

IV. THE CASE ~> 1

X=ne/n., Eq. (20) becomes In'Yi= -!~X(X+2)-\

i=1,2;~<1.

The same formula holds for the mean activity coefficient 'Y ± of the mobile ions:

~< 1.

MANNING

( 25)

The osmotic coefficient cp is easily calculated from Eq. (17) with the help of the derivative (ni=Ni/V, where Ni is the number of ions of species i), Indeed, since cp is defined in terms of the excess part of the osmotic pressure 1I"ex,

In this section one must distinguish between "real" and "effective" values. The symbol ~ refers to the real value, that is, the value calculated from Eq. (6) and a structural model of the polyion under study. According to Assumption (D) of Sec. II, however, when the real value of ~ is greater than unity, its effective value will be equal to one since condensed counterions will neutralize the fraction (1_r-l) of the polyion charge. Similarly, while the real (stoichiometric) concentration of counterions is (ne+ns) , the effective value (uncondensed counterions) is (r-1ne+n s)' The stoichiometric and effective concentrations of the co-ion have, of course, the same value ns. The simplest example is the salt-exclusion factor r. It follows from Eq. (30) that, to terms of order n e ,

n.' -n.=ner.

But because the effective equivalent polyelectrolyte concentration is r-1n e, it is also the case that

ns' -n8=~-lner( 1), one gets,

in agreement with the Lifson-Katchalsky result, Eq. (lOa) . Consider now a Donnan equilibrium in which the external compartment has the fixed salt concentration n.'. The internal compartment, which contains the polyelectrolyte solution, will have a lower salt concentration n 8 • The Donnan salt-exclusion factor r is defined by r= lim (ns'-ns)/ne.

where r(1) is the salt-exclusion factor for a polyelectrolyte with ~=1. According to Assumption (E) of Sec. II, r(1) may be obtained simply by setting ~= 1 in the Debye-Hilckel approximation to r given by Eq. (32), r(1) =i. Identification of the right-hand sides of Eqs. (33) and (34), together with Eq. (35), yields the desired result:

( 36)

This expression agrees with Eq. (9b), found by Gross and Strauss from a numerical solution of the PoissonBoltzmann equation. The derivation of the osmotic coefficient cp for values of ~> 1 is similar. The osmotic pressure 11" of the solution is given by On the other hand, since the effective concentration of mobile ions is (r-1n e+ 2n.) and the effective charge density of the polyion corresponds to ~ = 1,

It may be shown that ll

where the derivative of In'Y±, the mean activity coefficient of the mobile ions in the internal compartment, is to be evaluated in the limit of zero polyion concentration, i.e., in the limit as ns tends to no'; the approximation introduced in the second line becomes exact as n.' tends to zero. Note that the ideal value ('Y±='Y±' = 1) of r is!. It follows from Eqs. (25) and (31) that

where cp(1, r-1n e) is the osmotic coefficient of a solution whose polyelectrolyte species has charge density ~= 1 and equivalent concentration ~-lne, and whose concentration of added salt is the same value ns. The Debye-Hilckel approximation to this quantity is obtained from Eq. (28) with ~=1 and with X=ne/n. replaced by ~-lX: cp(l, ~-lne) = I-H-IX(r- 1X+2)-1.

in agreement with the result of Gross and Strauss, Eq. (9a) [their Eq. (26)].

Combination of Eqs. (37)-(39) yields the simple result

( 40)

In Eq. (27), the contribution of the concentration np of the polyions has been neglected with respect to n e , the minimum value of (nl+1l2). For the salt-free case, n.=O and X-HX) , while cp is denoted by CPP; thus,

[Page 7]

POLYELECTROLYTE SOLUTIONS. I

In salt-free solutions (q,=q,p, X -Hx) ), Eq. (40) reduces to ~>1, in agreement with the Lifson-Katchalsky result, Eq. (lOb) . Activity coefficients are also easily obtained. The stoichiometric activity of the counterion al is given by ( 42) Another expression for al in terms of "effective" quantities is al='Yl(l, r-1ne) (r- 1n e+n 8) ,

where 'Yl(1, r-1ne) has a meaning analogous to the corresponding osmotic coefficient in Eq. (38) and is obtained from Eq. (24),

'Yl(1, r-1ne) = exp[ -H- 1X/(r- 1X+2)].

It follows that 'Yl = (r- 1X + 1) (X+1)-1 exp[ -tr-1X/(r-1X +2) J,

For the square of the mean activity coefficient of the mobile ions,

'Y±2 ='Yl/'2= (r- 1X + 1) (X + 1)-1 X exp[ _r-IX/(~-IX+2)J,

~>1.

As a check, it may be verified that when r is calculated directly from Eqs. (31) and (48), the result (36) is recovered. V. ADDITIVITY RULES A number of interesting correlations may be found among the formulas of the two preceding sections. For example, comparison of Eq. (29) with Eq. (32), and Eq. (36) with Eq. (41) indicates that for all values of~, a formula which has been observed to agree well with experimental data for dilute solutions. 16 Moreover, Eqs. (28), (29), (40), and (41) show that, again for all ~, Equation (50) is a well-known formulation of the empirical "additivity rule" for the osmotic coefficient in dilute solutions. lO Equations (49) and (50) have been interpreted as meaning that the fraction (1-q,p) of the counterions Z. Alexandrowicz and A. Katchalsky, J. Polymer Sci. AI, 3231 (1963).

In'YI P= - t~, 'YI P =r- le- I / 2,

(51a)

(51b)

On comparison of these expressions with Eqs. (29) and ( 41), the relations

q,p = 1 In'YI P,

+

(52a)

'YIP/q,p = 2e-I/2~1.21,

~>1

(52b)

are obtained. These formulas differ from the conclusion of Katchalsky, Alexandrowicz, and Kedem lO that 'YIP =q,p. For solutions which contain an added simple salt, a relation between the osmotic coefficient and the mean activity coefficient of the mobile ions is given by Eqs. (25) and (28) :

Equation (53) does not hold in general when ~> 1, but imposition of the condition of excess salt, X«I, on Eqs. (40) and (48) yields (~> 1, X «1),

a formula which agrees well with experimental data. 9 Finally, if Eq. (50) is solved for ¢ subject to the condition X«1 (ne«n.) and the result substituted into Eqs. (53) and (54), the "additivity rule" for the mean activity coefficient is obtained (for either ~ < 1 or E> 1):

(ne/n.) «1.

(If both sides of this equation are multiplied by n.,

The activity coefficient of the co-ion is trivially obtained as ( 46) or ~>1.

from the polyelectrolyte salt is "bound" to the polyion, while the remaining fraction is "free," that is, does not interact with the polyion; mobile ions from the added simple salt are also assumed not to interact with the polyion. Thus, Eq. (49) would merely say that r is given by its ideal value with an effective equivalent polyion concentration q,pn e; Eq. (50) would mean that the osmotic pressure is given by van't Hoff's law as applied only to the free concentration of mobile ions. The present theory offers a different interpretation of Eqs. (49) and (50). Since it is clear that only condensed counterions should be classified as "bound," there are no bound counterions at all when ~<1; Eqs. (49) and (50) then follow entirely from the Debye-HUckel (diffuse ion atmosphere) treatment of all the mobile ions. When ~> 1, the fraction of condensed, or bound, counterions is (l_r-I), whereas q,p=tr- 1[see Eq. (41)J; therefore, (1- q,p) is not the fraction of bound counterions but rather reflects a combination of bound counterions and the effect of Debye-HUckel interactions on the uncondensed counterions. The relation between the activity coefficients and the osmotic coefficient is also of interest. If the counterion activity coefficient in salt-free solutions is denoted by 'YIP, Eqs. (24) and (45) yield the results

[Page 8]

GERALD

S.

TABLE 1. Comparison of theoretical with experimental values of r. System

Reference

~a

r e,pU b

rtheoret

NaPVSjNaCI

1.85

0.10

0.14

KPPjKBr

2.85

0.08

0.09

KDNAjKBr

4.20

0.09

0.06

NaPAjNaBr (<>=0.8)

2.28

0.11

0.11

NaPAjNaBr (<>=0.3)

0.86

O.N

0.29

NaPAj NaBr (<>=0.1)

0.29

0.38

0.43

a Calculated from Eqs.

(3) and (6). b In each case, these values correspond to the lowest salt concentration used in the measurements. C Calculated from Eq. (32) or Eq. (36).

'Yl(np+n,,) = (3/4~)np+ns = (3/2)cppn e+ns ,

The following abbreviations are used: PA (polyacrylate) ; PMA (polymethacrylate); PP (polyphosphate); PVS (polyvinyl sulfate) ; PSS (polystyrene sulfonate) ; PES (polyethylene sulfonate) ; DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) . Table I has been constructed for the Donnan saltexclusion factor. The first thing to note is that the theoretical values of r, calculated from Eq. (32) or Eq. (36) according to whether ~ is less than or greater than unity, are all in good agreement with the measured values.16.18-2o Since the theory gives the "limiting" values of r as the salt concentration tends to zero, the observed value of r listed in Table I is in each case that for the lowest salt concentration used. Note also that for the last three systems, which differ only in the values of ~, the observable trend is for r to increase toward its ideal value of 0.5 with decreasing charge density, and that the theoretical values follow this trend fairly well. In Fig. 1 an attempt is made to illustrate the "limiting-law" concept for polyelectrolyte solutions. The data for the KDNA system20 (open circles) and for the KPP systeml9 (filled circles) are plotted in Fig. l(a) as a function of external salt concentration. The theory [Eq. (36) ] predicts that with decreasing concentration the open circles should converge to the intercept of the lower dashed line, while the filled circles should converge to the (more or less equal) intercept of the upper dashed line. The data are inconclusive in that regard, but the trend for the two sets of points to become more alike as ns' decreases is obvious. In Fig. 1(b), both sets of points are for polyphosphate, but the open circles represent values when tetramethylammonium (TMA+) is used as the counterion; the salt is TMABr. The

G> 1, (ne!n )«1]; (56)

0.3 I-

whereas the additivity rule replaces the factor 3/2 with unity. For the co-ion, from Eq. (47),

KDNA

-

TMAPP

G> 1, (n e/n.)«l];

the additivity rule (all co-ions are "free") would read 'Y2n.=ns, i.e., 'Y2= 1. It is of interest in this connection that Lyons and Kotin have recently concluded on experimental grounds that the additivity rule for the counterion is not valid. 17

0.2 I-

KPP 0.1

_0 __ .. o_____ ~______• _

0.1

0.3

VI. COMPARISON WITH EXPERIMENT

This section will be devoted to a fairly comprehensive survey of the available data and their treatment by means of the formulas developed in the preceding sections. Numerical values of ~ are all calculated from Eqs. (3) and (6), ~=7.135b-l (25°C)' where, for example, b=2.5 A for polyphosphate or fully charged vinylic polyelectrolytes. If the fraction a of vinylic monomeric groups is charged, b=2.5a-1• For native DNA, b= 1.7 A.

J. W. Lyons and L. Kotin, J. Am. Chern. Soc. 87,1670 (1965).

0.5

Hs

KPP

•

•

--- .-------------

0.1

0.3

0.5

( b)

FIG. 1. In (a), open circles are data for system KDNA-KBr (Ref. 20); filled circles for KPP-KBr (Ref. 19). Dashed lines are respective values of rtheoretj see Table I. In (b), open circles are data for TMAPP-TMABrj filled circles are same data as in (a). Dashed line is value of rtheoret for PP(~=2.85). n.' (equivalents/liter) is salt concentration in external compartmen.t. 18 M. Nagasawa, A. Takahashi, M. Izumi, and 1. Kagawa, J. Polymer Sci. 38, 213 (1959). 19 U. P. Strauss and P. Ander, J. Am. Chern. Soc. 80, 6494 20 U. P. Strauss, C. Helfgott, and H. Pink, J. Phys. Chern. 71, 2550 (1967).

the interpretation in terms of "bound" and "free" ions becomes clear: the lhs is the product of the activities of counter- and co-ions; the rhs would be the product of the respective "free" concentrations.) It is to be noted that CPP' not 'YIP, appears in Eq. (55); empirical formulations of the additivity rules have sometimes used the assumption that CPp='YI P , which is not true for the present theory. It is also significant that Eq. (55) is restricted by the condition of excess salt, while Eq. (50) holds for any value of the ratio (ne/ns); previous discussions of the additivity rules treat both formulas on the same footing. Incidentally, the additivity rule for the counterion alone does not hold here. Thus, from Eq. (45),

MANNING

[Page 9]

POLYELECTROLYTE SOLUTIONS. 1

a=0.5

a = 0.8

t = 1.43

t = 2.28 0.6 FIG. 2. Comparison of Eq. (40) for the osmotic coefficient cf> (solid lines) with data from Ref. 21.

~

0.4

0.2

1.0 ~--------------,

a =0.8

0.8

~ =2.28 0.6

0.41--..,---,0.80

FIG. 3. Comparison of Eq. (48) for the mean activity coefficient n (solid line) with data from Ref. 21.

Z. Alexanrlrowicz, J. Polymer Sci. 43, 337 (1960).

..Ix given by Eq. (40). The points cover a range of values of the total mobile ion concentration n, n=n e+2n.,

varying from 1.4XIo- N to 0.17N. Data for 'Y± (Alexandrowicz's quantity I. is equal to 'Y±2) are shown in Fig. 3 for a similar concentration range of n; the theoretical curve is found from Eq. (48). If Eqs. (40) and (48) are to be interpreted as limiting laws, then they give the limiting value of cp and 'Y±, respectively, for a fixed value of X as n tends to zero. Data over a wide concentration range for a fixed value of X are not available at present, but the inset in Fig. 3 is intended to show the possibilities of such a point of view. The lower point is the value of 'Y± measured when n=O.17N; the upper point is that measured at n= 0.006N. In both cases, X~1. The theory is in excellent agreement with the value of 'Y± in the more dilute solution. In Fig. 4, curves computed from Eqs. (45) and (47) are compared with measured values of the singlemobile-ion activity coefficients. 17 .22 Both sets of data were taken for the system NaPVS with added NaCI, although ~ is somewhat higher for 1'1, the sodium activity coefficient,17 than for 1'2, the chloride activity coefficient.22 The value of It ranges from 1.9XIo-3N3.2XIo-2N for 1'1 and from 3XIo-3N-4.5XlO-2N for 1'2' Nagasawa, Izumi, and Kagawa22 also measured 'YNa+ for their system with the use of a sodium amalgam electrode; their values (not included in Fig. 4) are lower than those predicted by Eq. (45). Lyons and Kotin l7 used a cation-exchange resin for their measurements of 'YNa+; Nagasawa et al. used a AgCI electrode for 'Yel-. Lyons and Kotin l7 also report counterion activity coefficients for NaPSS and NaPP, both with added NaCl. These data (along with some points from Fig. 22 M. N agasawa, M. Izumi, I. Kagawa, J. Polymer Sci. 37, 375

closed circles are the same KPP data as in Fig. 1(a). The theory predicts that both sets of points will converge to the intercept of the dashed line. Again, the data are inconclusive, but it looks as though the TMA+ and K + points could be converging to the same value. The theory preducts only the intercept; Fig. 1 is not meant to imply that the slope should be zero. Alexandrowicz21 has published extensive data for the osmotic coefficient cp and the mean activity coefficient 'Y± of the mobi~ ions. The system is NaPMA with various degrees of neutralization a and with added NaBr. In Fig. 2, the data for cp are plotted as a function of Xl/2 and compared with the theoretical expression

[Page 10]

GERALD

S.

MANNING 1.0 ~-------_ _ _ _ __

0.8

0, O.B

f/)

'E

CII

'-

•

"0

0.6

c?p,Yi

0.6

0.4

>oCII

.-= C

-

•~

0.2

YI

<r0

0.2

FIG. 4. Comparison of Eq. (45) for the counterion activity coefficient /'1 (lower solid line; ~=2.36) and Eq. (47) for the co-ion activity coefficient /'2 (upper solid line; ~= 1.85) with data from Refs. 17 and 22, respectively.

n,X1()3(N)

Experimental and theoretical values of /'1. n,XI03 (N)

(NaPSS; NaCl) , ~=2.34 0.293 0.107

/'1 (exptl)" /'1 [Eq. (45) ]

2.74

0.47

0.49

9.11

3.34

2.73

0.47

0.49

1.97

0.673

2.93

0.45

0.47

(NaPP; NaCI) , ~=2.85 0.310 0.099

3.13

0.46

0.42

0.613

0.196

3.13

0.47

0.42

1.25

0.398

3.14

0.46

0.42

2.48

0.794

3.12

0.46

0.42

4.93

1.38

3.57

0.40

0.41

9.75

1.53

6.37

0.42

0.34

(NaPVS; NaC!) , ~=2.37 2.20 3.04 5.32 7.34 33.7 45.7

1.38 1.38 1.36

0.51 0.49 0.48

0.59 0.59 0.59

• Taken from Ref. 17.

W. Kern, Makromol. Chemie 2,279 (1948). 2' M. Nagasawa and I. Kagawa, J. Polymer Sci. 2S, 61 (1957). 26 A. M. Liquori, S. Ascoli, C. Botre, V. Crescenzi, and A. Mele, J. Polymer Sci. 40, 169 (1959). 26 T. Okubo, Y. Nishizaki, and N. Ise, J. Phys. Chern. 69,3690 27 L. Costantino, V. Crescenzi, F. Quadrifoglio, and V. Vitagliano, J. Polymer Sci. AS, 771 (1967).

FIG. 5. Comparison of Eqs. (Sla) and (SIb) for the counterion activity coefficient /'IP in salt-free solutions (upper curve) with data (open circles) from Ref. 27, and of Eqs. (29) and (41) for the osmotic coefficient q,p in salt-free solutions (lower curve) with data (filled circles) from Refs. 28 and 29.

exceptions, they may easily be summarized by stating that for values of b in the range 2.5-3.5 A (0.7<a<1.0 for vinylic polymers) values of 'YIP fall between 0.20 and 0.35. According to Eq. (51b), the present theory predicts the value 0.21 when b=2.5 A (~=2.85) and 0.30 when b=3.5 A (~=2.04). In particular, Liquori et al.25 found that 'YIP was almost the same (0.21-0.25, insofar as the points may be read from their graphs) for fully neutralized NaPA, NaPES, and NaPP, all characterized by b = 2.5 A [theoretical value 0.21 from Eq. (51b) J. Usually, variation ohlP with polyelectrolyte concentration ne is reported to be small, although a tendency to decrease with decreasing ne is frequently observed. 17 ,23,24 In Fig. 5, the upper curve is computed from Eqs. (51a) and (51b). The data (open circles) are from Costantino et at. 27 The poor agreement for low values of ~ is probably due to the breakdown in the validity of the assumption of local rodlike structure. 27 The agreement for ~> 1 is excellent. As examples of the osmotic coefficient in salt-free solutions CPp, one may compare the value 0.13 (ne= 0.02N) found by Alexandrowicz and Katchalsky l6 for LiPP and NaPP (~=2.85) to the value 0.18 from Eq. (41). Data for NaPA and NaPMA are summarized by

0.20 ______________________________________ 0_ 0.15

O.IO~

jo

0.050~-..l--~--'---2~-...L---!3;--L---:;:4

n. x I02(N) FlG. 6. Data for ipp at low concentrations n, compared to the value

given by Eq. (41) (dashed line).

4) are shown in Table II. Note in particular that, in accordance with the theory, the measured values of 'YI are the same for fixed values of X. Data are plentiful for the counterion activity coefficient 'YIP in salt-free solutions. 17 ,23-27 With very few TABLE II.

, •

•

•

::J

[Page 11]

POLYELECTROLYTE

SOLUTIONS.

28W. Kern, Z. Physik. Chern. AI84, 197 (1939); also see Table I in Ref. 10. 29 Z. Alexandrowicz, J. Polymer Sci. 40, 91 (1959). 30 A. Takahashi, N. Kato, and M. Nagasawa (private communication) . 31 P. Chu and J. A. Marinsky, J. Phys. Chern. 71, 4352 (1967).

I wish to express my thanks to L. On sager and U. P. Strauss for stimulating conversations, and to S. A. Rice and M. Nagasawa for reading and commenting on the manuscript. Dr. Nagasawa was kind enough to send me some of his most recent data before publication.

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

On the basis of certain assumptions stated in Sec. II, formulas have been derived for colligadve properties of polyelectrolyte solutions and shown to be frequently in quantitative agreement with experimental measurements (without the help of adjustable parameters). The formulas are thought to be "limiting laws" but in a restricted sense, a point which I wish to pursue further here with special reference to Fig. 6. For an imaginary system of polyions which really are

infinitely long cylinders, the formulas give the limiting values (not the slopes) as the total mobile-ion concentration tends to zero. [For a solution which contains added simple salt, the ratio (ne/n.) must be fixed when the limit is taken.J For a real polyelectrolyte, these "limiting values" can still be observed, but only if the lowest mobile-ion concentration used is still sufficiently large for c 1 to be less than 1o, the average length of a local rodlike segment of the polyion chain. (Strictly speaking, K should be calculated in this context from the concentration of un condensed mobile ions, but such a distinction is not important for the order-of-magnitude arguments being presented.) Consider, for example, two charged groups separated by (m-1) other charged groups along the chain. According to the model of an infinitely long cylinder (fully stretched chain) the distance between these groups is mb. Now if mb is sufficiently large to be comparable with 1o, the actual average distance will be somewhat less than mb because of the globally flexible structure of the chain. This observation will be of no consequence as long as K- 1 is less than 1o, for then the groups will be effectively screened; and I suggest that that is why the data in Fig. 6 for values of ne larger than 5 X 1O-3N reflect the predicted limiting value for an infinitely long, fully stretched chain, and also why the values of c/J P extrapolated from the high concentration range by Chu and Marinsky agree with the theoretical value. But as K decreases and c 1 becomes comparable to 1o, interactions between these distant groups become important and are underestimated by the infinite cylinder model. Although the error is due to the deviation from cvlindrical symmetry, these "end effects" may be for:naUy treated by retaining the cylindrical symmetry and allowing b to become a function of K which decreases with its argument. In Fig. 6, a value of b equal to about half that for a fully stretched chain [Eq. (3)J would give agreement with the measured value of c/JP when ne:::::::8 X 1O-4N. The deviation of this "adjusted" parameter b from the fixed value determined from Eq. (3) is a measure of how far the system deviates from the model of Sec. II. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

the filled circles28 •29 in Fig. 5; the lower curve is drawn according to Eqs. (29) and (41). As for 'YIP, the agreement is better for high charge densities than for low, probably because the cylindrically symmetric model is a poor description of the actual polymer configuration for small ~. Some recent measurements of c/JP by Takahashi, Kato, and Nagasawa30 for the system NaPPS (~=2.85) are of considerable interest. In Fig. 6, these data are compared with the theoretical value c/Jp=0.18 (dashed line). For solutions more dilute than O.OOSN, c/Jp is observed to decrease sharply with further dilution. Above this concentration, the theoretical value is in excellent agreement with those observed. The data of Takahashi et aI. should be considered as a complement to those of Chu and Marinsky,31 who measured c/J P in salt-free PSS (a=0.92) solutions for no less than nine counterions: H+, Li+, Na+, K+, Cs+, NH4+ and the first three members of the tetraalkylammonium series-TMA+, TEA,+ and TBA+. The lowest concentration used was ne = O.OSN; thus, Chu and Marinsky started where Takahashi et al. left off. In Figs. 1 and 2 of their paper, Chu and Marinsky plot c/J P as a function of ne for each of the nine counterions and find that a linear extrapolation to ne=O is easily accomplished. In each case, the extrapolated value lies in the range 0.20-0.23. The theoretical value (~=2.62) from Eq. (41) is 0.19. A unified interpretation of the measurements of Takahashi, Kato, and Nagasawa and of Chu and Marinsky based on the "limiting-law" concept is given in the next section.
