[Page 1]

Research briefing

expression can be regulated across boundaries generated by CTCF– cohesin loops Using a series of mouse mutants, we found that the Sox2 promoter does not require CTCF–cohesin loops to interact with distal enhancers. Surprisingly, mice with varying numbers of CTCF motifs in different positions showed that some distal enhancers can bypass boundaries that are created by CTCF–cohesin loops to ensure robust Sox2 expression.

This is a summary of: Chakraborty, S. et al. Enhancer–promoter interactions can bypass CTCF-mediated boundaries and contribute to phenotypic robustness. Nat. Genet. https://doi. org/10.1038/s41588-022-01295-6 (2023). Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Published online: xx xx xxxx

Check for updates

The question Accurate tissue-specific gene expression relies on genome folding mechanisms to guide distal enhancers to their target promoters and insulate off-target genes to prevent their activation. Loops created by the action of CTCF and cohesin can facilitate both enhancer recruitment and insulation processes1. However, interactions between enhancers and promoters can also be established independently of CTCF–cohesin loops, and some of these loops cannot completely insulate enhancer–promoter contacts1,2. Sox2 encodes a transcription factor that is essential for implantation of mouse blastocysts, specification of the neural lineage and anterior foregut (AFG) development3. CTCF binding motifs determine the location of loop anchors, and there are CTCF motifs directly upstream of Sox2 (Fig. 1a). Thus, we investigated whether CTCF–cohesin loops recruit Sox2 enhancers to the Sox2 promoter and what defines the ability of CTCF-created boundaries to delimit the range of enhancer action. We also investigated how the interplay between CTCF–cohesin loops and Sox2 enhancer–promoter interactions changes throughout development in different Sox2-expressing tissues.

The observation Mouse lines in which we deleted CTCF motifs upstream of Sox2 showed that CTCF– cohesin loops are neither required for Sox2 interactions with distal enhancers, nor for Sox2 transcriptional activation in any of the tissues we tested. Insertion of various combinations of CTCF motifs to test the ability of CTCF–cohesin loops to block enhancer– promoter interactions resulted in varying degrees of insulation of Sox2. In blastocysts, loss of Sox2 expression correlated with the extent to which the insertion of CTCF motifs reduced enhancer contacts, confirming that the frequency of enhancer–promoter interactions can influence transcriptional output (Fig. 1b). The orientation of CTCF motifs determines the ability of CTCF to retain cohesin and form loops1. A comparison across our mutants showed that motifs clustered in divergent orientations block enhancer–promoter contacts more efficiently than multiple motifs clustered in the same orientation. However, to our surprise, none of our insertions of CTCF motifs fully insulated Sox2 in blastocysts. Capture Hi-C showed that even the mouse line with CTCF–cohesin loops that were capable of creating the strongest ectopic insulation was able to

establish enhancer–promoter contacts that induced enough Sox2 expression for successful blastocyst implantation. Similarly, the introduction of CTCF–cohesin loops failed to disrupt Sox2 expression in neural tissues. In contrast with the robustness of blastocysts and neural tissues to the perturbation of chromatin structure, the AFG was highly susceptible. Mouse lines carrying the strongest ectopic CTCF–cohesin loops displayed a complete loss of Sox2 in the AFG, which resulted in failure to separate esophagus and trachea in the embryo (Fig. 1c). A comparison between AFG enhancers and those driving Sox2 expression in blastocysts and neural tissues led us to propose that the spatial distribution of enhancers contributes to their ability to bypass CTCF–cohesin loops.

Future directions We suggest that the ability of enhancers to bypass CTCF–cohesin loops and activate target promoters is determined by two factors: loop insulation strength and robustness of enhancer–promoter interactions. We propose that enhancers that are clustered at high density — such as those in blastocysts or neural tissues — may establish more robust contacts with their target promoters, which could facilitate their ability to overcome CTCF-mediated insulation. By contrast, spreading of the Sox2 enhancer elements through large domains, as in the AFG, diminishes the ability of these elements to bypass boundaries generated by CTCF–cohesin loops. New techniques that can produce large synthetic DNA fragments4 can now be used to test these hypotheses by deconstructing and reconstructing enhancers at different densities. Many chromosomal rearrangements, such as amplifications or duplications, can endanger the ability of enhancers to interact with target promoters. Enhancer– promoter interactions that can bypass strong boundaries, such as those we report here for Sox2, may contribute to ensuring accurate gene expression upon such events, and increase phenotypic robustness. It will now be crucial to understand the mechanisms driving the formation of these regulatory interactions. Together with another study from our laboratory5, these data suggest that enrichment of active chromatin marks or the transcriptional machinery at promoters and enhancers could positively contribute to their interaction frequency. Shreeta Chakraborty & Pedro P. Rocha National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD, USA.

[Page 2]

Expert opinion

References authors add substantially to the growing body of literature regarding CTCF and enhancer–promoter interactions.” Bing Ren, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA

“The main strength of the manuscript is the use of genetically engineered mouse models to study Sox2 regulation in vivo across different developmental stages and tissues. The experimental observations made by the

1.

Figure 2.

Long distance interaction of Sox2 with SCR in ES cells

1.0

Capture HiC

0

Loss of SOX2 in AFG-derived tissues and failure to separate trachea and esophagus CTCFi 3X(–);3X(+) Merge NKX2.1 Es

100 kb

SCR

CTCF

C2–C4

C5

wt

0–50

Tracheoesophageal fistula Lu

Sox2 fc in blastocysts

4.

St

0–1000

14 kb

wt

hom

P = 0.015

SCR can activate Sox2 through CTCF insertions P = 9.7 × 10–4

P = 8.0 × 10–3

2

P = 0.046

P =3.9 × 10–6 P = 0.01

1

0

CTCFi3X(–) n = 17, 17

CTCFi3X(+) n = 14, 13

CTCFi18X(+) n = 12, 12

CTCFi 3X(–);3X(+) SCR∆ n = 6, 4 n = 18, 11

Fig. 1 | Some enhancers bypass CTCF loops. a, 3D structure of the Sox2 locus in blastocyst-derived cells, as measured by capture Hi-C. The Sox2 control region (SCR) enhancer drives Sox2 expression in blastocysts; the arrowhead in the image represents Sox2–SCR interactions, which were never fully abolished in any mutant. Red and blue arrows under the CTCF chromatin immunoprecipitation bar plot indicate CTCF motif orientation. b, Sox2 fold change (fc) in mutant blastocysts of mouse lines with CTCF motifs inserted in different amounts and orientations compared to wild-type littermates. The mouse line in which SCR was deleted (SCR∆) lost the most Sox2 expression. c, E13.5 embryos with CTCF insertions fail to express Sox2 in the AFG and do not separate esophagus (Es) and trachea (Tr); the transcription factor NKX2.1 is present across the Es and stomach (St) in mutants instead of in Tr and lungs (Lu). Scale bars, 500 μm. © 2023, Chakraborty, S. et al.

Studying the effects of structural perturbations in our mouse mutants was a series of surprises. We were neither expecting Sox2 regulation to be independent of CTCF, nor the insertion of CTCF-generated boundaries to be unable to fully abolish enhancer–promoter contacts in early development. Also, while screening founder mice for motif insertions, we detected a mysterious PCR band and realized that pups from this line died shortly after birth. It took us some time to understand that this band represented an accidental CRISPR byproduct with 18 motif insertions, but this accident

5.

From the editor

Behind the paper

3.

0–50

0–500

H3K27ac NIPBL

C1

34.82Mb

Tr

Lu

hom

Chr3:34.58Mb

RAD21

0.01

Huang, H. et al. CTCF mediates dosageand sequence-context-dependent transcriptional insulation by forming local chromatin domains. Nat. Genet. 53, 1064–1074 (2021). This paper dissects the ability of CTCF loops to insulate Sox2 expression in embryonic stem cells. Taylor, T. et al. Transcriptional regulation and chromatin architecture maintenance are decoupled functions at the Sox2 locus. Gene Dev. 36, 699–717 (2022). This paper describes CTCF-independent recruitment of enhancers of Sox2 in embryonic stem cells. Kondoh H. & Lovell -Badge R. Sox2: Biology and Role in Development and Disease (Academic Press, 2015). A book with an extensive description of the multiple roles of SOX2 throughout development. Brosch, R. et al. Synthetic regulatory genomics uncovers enhancer context dependence at the Sox2 locus. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.06.20. 495832 (2022). A preprint study that reconstructs the enhancer SCR with different components. Thompson, J. T. et al. Extensive co-binding and rapid redistribution of NANOG and GATA6 during emergence of divergent lineages. Nat. Commun. 13, 4257 (2022). This paper describes how Sox2–SCR interaction frequencies correlate with the amount of H3K27ac (an epigenetic marker of enhancer activation) at SCR.

ended up being a very important addition to our study. An ‘eureka’ moment happened when we saw complete loss of Sox2 in the foregut of some of our mutants, which led us to see how CTCF-mediated loops can have a much greater phenotypic effect in some tissues than they do in others. S.C.

“The role of CTCF in regulating chromatin architecture and developmental gene expression is still incompletely understood. This work addresses this topic in vivo, focusing on a single locus across tissues. A key take-home message is that the insulating function of CTCF-binding sites can be tissue-specific. The results are thought-provoking and will stimulate further investigations that should provide mechanistic insight into the contextdependent contribution of CTCF and 3D chromatin dynamics.” Tiago Faial, Chief Editor, Nature Genetics
