[Page 1]

RESEARCH ARTICLE | APRIL 15 1977

Critical point wetting  John W. Cahn

J. Chem. Phys. 66, 3667–3672 (1977) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.434402

  View Online

Export Citation

Articles You May Be Interested In Research of fuzzy adaptive filter in the problem SINS AIP Conference Proceedings (February 2021)

Cross Sections and Interpretation of Dissociative Attachment Reactions Producing OH−, O−, and H− in H2O J. Chem. Phys. (November 1972)

Theory of capacitance and conductance behavior of Schottky‐barrier and conducting M‐I‐S diodes with interface traps J. Appl. Phys. (September 1977)

[Page 2]

Critical point wetting John W. Cahn Department of Materials Science and Engineering. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Cambridge. Massachusetts 02139 (Received 29 November 1976) It is shown that in any two-phase mixture of fluids near their critical point, contact angles against any third phase become zero in that one of the critical phases completely wets the third phase and excludes contact with the other critical phase. A surface layer of the wetting phase continues to exist under a range of conditions when this phase is no longer stable as a bulk. At some temperature below the critical, this perfect wetting terminates in what is described as a first-order transition of the surface. This surface firstorder transition may exhibit its own critical point. The theory is qualitatively in agreement with observations.

ties of the type

INTRODUCTION

In the course of investigating1 ,2 nucleation in binary systems near the critical point, we noted that the contact angles vanished well before the critical point was reached. The contact angle is the dihedral angle e that the interface between the two fluid phases makes with any third phase surface such as the container wall or even the vapor/liquid surface [Fig. 1(a)]. For a surface of a solid phase x in contact with two fluid phases a and f3 the contact angle e is given by resolving surface free energies (J along the solid surface 3 :

(2') are satisfied. Experimentally, it will be impossible to observe a surface for which the inequality of Eq. (2') fails. At equilibrium, any surface for which the inequality might have failed will be replaced by the intruding layer [of the k-phase in Eq. (2')] and the free energy of the ij interface will be given by the sum of the free energies of the interfaces of the intruding layer. Thus, if i3 intrudes into the a-y surface, (3')

where the subscripts designate the phases adjoining the surface or interface. No value of e satisfies the equation unless If the inequality is not satisfied, one of the fluid phases

completely wets the solid and there is no contact between solid and the other fluid phase. In effect the forbidden surface is replaced by a layer of the wetting phase and the surface free energy becomes the sum of the two surfaces' free energies of the layer, e.g.,

is a completely self-consistent value of the a'4' surface free energy. For all practical purposes the only interface between the a and y phases is one in which there is an intruding layer of the i3-phase, and if there is any bulk f3-phase, it will perfectly wet the a'4' interface. The inequalities [Eqs. (2)] depict a triangular cone [Fig. 2(a» for the domain of observable surface free energies in a three-phase system. The interior space

leading to a completely self-consistent description in which e has become zero. This is called perfect wetting of the solid.

(01

As we approach the critical point, (JaS and (J",,, - (Js" both vanish, and the equation for the contact angle becomes indeterminate. Since (JaB approaches zero as (.ilT), 1.3 and (J",,, - (Js" should approach zero as the composition difference and hence as (.ilT)o.3, we expect cose to begin to diverge as (.ilT)-l·o and to reach the value of 1.0 at some temperature below the critical temperature. Therefore, close enough to the critical point we expect perfect wetting of any solid by one of the critical phases. When three fluid phases, a, (3, and yare in contact along a curve or line, the dihedral angles in Fig. 1(b) are given by ~-~-~

sinBy - sine", - sines

(1 ')

As before, no solutions exist unless all three inequaliThe Journal of Chemical Physics. Vol. 66, No.8, 15 April 1977

( b)

FIG. 1. Definitions of dihedral angles at junctions of three surfaces where three phases meet. (a) C/ and fJ are fluids. x is an insoluble nondeforming solid. (b) C/, fJ, 'Yare fluids.

[Page 3]

energy of a unit area of this surface is <I>(cs), where c. is the limiting co mposition of the fluid at x = O. We seek to obtain the composition profile and excess free energy due to the surface by finding that function c{x) which minimizes the exceSs free energy of a unit area of surface4~

(

~F=<I>(cs)+ fQ~ [~j+K(dc/dx)21dx,

where c(oo)=cQ is the bulk composition of the flUid, ~j= j(c) - j(co) ~ (c - co)( 8j / 8c )co is the free energy needed to create a unit volume of uniform fluid of composition c from a large reservior at composition co, and K(dc/dx)2 is the contribution due to the presence of a gradient. We assume K is a positive constant. Subscripts such as Co after a derivative are used to indicate evaluation at that composition. By standard methods of variational calculus, the minimum ill ~F occurs when c(x) obeys ~j=K(dc/dx)2+const ,

with a natural boundary condition 7 at x= 0: (b)

trajectory near a -f3 critical point

cf> -2K(dc/dx)s=0,

where cf>=d<l>/dc s and (dc/dx)s=lim,,~odc/dx. Using the boundary condition at infinity, Eq. (5) becomes ~j=K(dc/dx)2

in Fig. 2(a) are permitted values. The bounding planes are the three equations of the form of Eq. (3) and represent perfect wetting. These together with the requirement that the a's must be positive define the space of observable combinations of values of a's. If state variables are altered such that ~ is no longer a stable phase in bulk, the a-y surface may still have a layer of ~ as part of the equilibrium in that the replacement of the a-)' surface by two lower free energy surfaces may be favored in spite of the need to create a layer of a phase that is not stable in bulk. The optimum thickness of the f3 layer and whether or not such a model is self-consistent thermodynamically will be examined in this paper.

Inserting this into the boundary condition, Eq. (6) yields cf> = ± 2 .fiC£.itCJ ,

which is the equation that determines The taking of square roots introduces a problem of signs. Which sign corresponds to the solution for c. is unambiguously and easily found by returning to Eq. (6). We assume cf> to be negative. Under those conditions, dc/dx:=. 0 and c. 2: C 2: co. For cf> positive, the reverse would be true. Equation (7) is integrated to give the boundary profile x(c):

The minimum value of ~F is the equilibrium surface free energy a. By using Eq. (7) to combine terms and changing the variable of integration from x to c in Eq. (4), we obtain (lOa) Since <I>(c.) - <I>(co) =

ITHEORY

Consider the free energy of the semiinfinite fluid in contact with a planar surface at x = O. Let us assume that the surface is solid and sharp on an atomic scale and that the interactions between surface and fluid are sufficiently short-range that the contribution to the free

Cs

cf>dc,

this can also be written a= <I> (c 0) + fCS(cf> +2 "';K~.f)dc

(lOb)

Equations (lOa) and (lOb) are, of course, equivalent.

J. Chern. Phys., Vol. 66, No.8, 15 April 1977

or FIG. 2. (a) In a plot of the three surface free energies, the conditions for perfect wetting describe three plane surfaces which together form a triangular cone. Experimentally observed values of the three surface tensions must plot on a point that lies within or on the surface of the cone. With changing temperature, the loci of points describing the three surface tensions must trace a curve within or on the cone. If O! and {3 become identical at the critical point, the curve must tend to the edge as indicated. (b) A section of the cone near the edge where 0!8y = (Jya indicates the approach to the critical point and the firstorder wetting transition.

[Page 4]

in free energy.] Since the area under the 2~I(~f curve represents u cr8 , we see that Eq. (3) is automatically satisfied, and this represents perfect wetting. The ax surface corresponds to an ~(3 surface and a $X surface and a layer of (3. Because ~f = 0 at c = CB, there are no concentration gradients in the intruding (3 layer where the (3 composition exists, and as we shall see, the layer would be infinitely thick in an infinite system.

-4>

i0

'c

"Q;

~

The first-order surface transition

::J

Q;

>.

.,~

lJ.J

com posit ion

FIG. 3. The changes in surface free energy due to a surface composition change according to Eq. (lOb) can be depicted graphically. The bulk fluid has composition co. The area under the - cp curve is the reduction in energy of the layer at the surface. The area under the 2.,fKKJ curve is the increase in energy due to composition changes in the fluid. The shaded area is the largest reduction in surface free energy which occurs when the surface composition is at c S' the intersection ofthe two curves.

The surface of an undersaturated phase near the critical point Let us now consider a temperature above the firstorder surface transition temperature for a-(3 equilibrium and consider Co to the left of ca. The (3-phase is no longer an equilibrium bulk phase. The fluid is un-

In Fig. 3 we plot as a function of C the two quantities

- cp and ± 2 ~K~J. The area under the - cp curve represents the reduction in free energy due to the reduction in 4>(c) when C s changes. The area under the 2/KilT curve is the increase in free energy due to the inhomogeneous surface layer when C s changes. The area between these two curves is the net reduction in free energy. Clearly, the intersection of the two curves gives the equilibrium C s consistent with Eq. (8).

.~

Cl.

~

Perfect wetting near the critical point Let us now apply the above theory to a two-phase fluid below its critical pOint. Since the two phases are in equilibrium, ~f is given by a curve which is zero for the compositions representing the two phases inequilibrium with a maximum in between. Because the maximum vanishes at the critical temperature, close to the critical point, the maximum in ~f is so small that no solution for C s by Eq. (8) is possible for any composition between the two compositions of the coexisting phase. The same value of c s will be obtained for either fluid phase, and if we take cp negative, will be for a C s greater than the composition of the phase with the higher composition. [The intersection of - cp and 2~I(~f at c< Co results from the other sign of the square root. It leads to concentration gradients that do not satisfy Eq. (6) and do not correspond to an extreinum

::J

composition

FIG. 4. At a temperature T j close to the critical temperature, we have perfect wetting. The Q-X surface consists of an Q-f3 surface plus the f3-x surface. At the temperature T 2 , three intersections suggest three possible Q-X surfaces. Because the area B represents an increase in surface energy, the intersection at II represents a maximum. Depending on the relative areas of B and C, either I or III is the minimum. At a temperature where the ares of B and C are equal, there is a firstorder surface transition.

J. Chern. Phys., Vol. 66, No.8, 15 April 1977

From its definition in Eq. (4), 4>(cs) is the free energy of the solid surface in contact with fluid at the actual surface composition and the integral in Eq. (lOa) is the excess free energy of the nonuniform flUid layer. Equation (lOb) has 4>(co) as the free energy of the solid in contact with the homogeneous fluid of the bulk composition and the integral represents the change in u due to the change in surface composition. The equations permit a graphical analysis of this problem. 8

As the temperature is reduced, the hump in We ~f curve increases. This gives rise to three solutions of Eq. (8) that do correspond to extrema in surface free energy for co= ca' An inspection of Eq. (lOb) indicates that the middle solution is a maximum, the others are local minima. Which is the absolute minimum depends on the relative areas depicted in Fig. 4. When the hump is small, the right-hand intersection remains the value of C s for both phases and we have wetting. When the hump is large, the left-hand intersection becomes the solution for C s when co= COl' while, of course, the right-hand interaction is C s for Co = CB' Perfect wetting no longer exists; the inequality (2) is satisfied. There is one temperature where the two values of C s lead to identical a's for the a-x interface. This corresponds to a first-order transition in the a-x interface.

[Page 5]

below the consolute critical temperature. The firstorder transition in the a-x surface is depicted on the phase diagram, Fig. 6. <l

Below the first-order transition temperature, the QI-X surface has a composition profile with some posi-

tive adsorption. The compositions never reach cs, and the quantity adsorbed is always finite even when Co approaches c"'. Since a gravitation field will affect the relative stability of the a- and B-phases, if x is a solid phase, it should be possible to display the first-order transition as a horizontal line along a vertical a-x surface. Such a sudden change in thickness is similar to the black film region in soap films. 9 GIBBS ADSORPTION EQUATION

We next demonstrate that this theory is completely consistent with the Gibbs adsorption equation. Consider an isothermal change in co. Differentiating Eq. (9) or Eq. (lOa) or (lOb) yields aa fC S - a ·lKajdc. =2 aco co aco

composition

From the definition of aj, we have aaj aCo = (c - co) (a'i) a? C

By our using Eq. (8) to change the variable of integration, this becomes - aa/aco= (a~/ac2)co

dersaturated with respect to {3. aj, the difference between j and a line tangent to j at co, is depicted for several values of under saturation in Fig. 5. Initially, there is still a minimum in aj at CB and a maximum in between. As Co moves further to the left, these eventually disappear. At small differences between Co and c"" the surface still appears to be wetted by a layer of {3. The minimum in aj near CB implies a sloping inflection pOint in the composition profile. Thus the (3-layer is nowhere homogeneous.

Cs

·IK/aj(c - co)dc

Surface critical point point

Whenever c a - Co is small, we can express aj near CB by aj- ajmln+ i(c - c M )2(a j/ac )CB '

...

where

OJ :::l

perfect wetting

~

OJ

ajmID-(a 2j/ac 2 )c (ca-Co)(CB-C a ).

finite contact angle

'"

We obtain a half-thickness of the layer l/2 by integration of Eq. (9) between Xo and the inflection point in the profile. For ajmlD« cp2/K l-[2/C/(a'i/ac2)csF/2(lncp2/K-InajmID),

indicating that l diverges as -In(c '" - co). The first-order transition occurs in the a-x surface at definite values of Co over the range of temperatures where multiple intersections of the - cp and ± 2~ exist. Where multiple intersection first ceases to exist, a critical temperature terminates the surface first-order transitions. Depending on the form of cp, this surface critical temperature can occur above or

composition FIG. 6. The properties of the surface between the x-phase and the fluid phase as a function of the temperature and Co can be mapped on a phase diagram. Perfect wetting occurs only when both fluid phases are stable and close to their critical point. The first-order transition extends into the single-phase region and terminates in a surface critical point.

J. Chern. Phys., Vol. 66, No.8, 15 April 1977

FIG. 5. When Q is progressively more undersaturated with respect to f3, Ai is given by the difference between the f curve and a tangent to the f curve at co. As a result, there may be a first-order surface transition when the bulk composition is c o(2).

[Page 6]

DISCUSSION

The following has been established from the phenomenological treatment. (i) In any mixture of two fluid phases (a: and (:3) sufficiently close to their critical point, contact angles become zero against a surface of any third phase x, which is not involved in the critical point. One critical phase, say e, always perfectly wets the extraneous phase. (ii) The description of the surface between the other critical phase QI and the extraneous phase x by an intruding layer of the wetting phasee is fully self-consistent in that results obtained from such a description obey the Gibbs adsorption equation and the equations for the dihedral angles at three-phase junctions.

temperature

FIG. 7. The free energy of the surface between the x-phase and the fluid is given as a function of temperature for a variety of compositions. The curves terminate at the two-phase field. c 3 is the critical composition; c 5 is the composition at which the surface critical point occurs. The dashed line is the surface first-order transition.

If we let 1 represent the component corresponding to c

and 2 the other component, then the surface excesses r of the two components are defined by

r 1 = - r 2 = So'0 (c- co)dx =

vK/Af(c - co)dc .

Since

(iv) The first-order QI-X surface transition persists to temperatures and compositions where the wetting B phase is no longer stable in bulk. The surface transition terminates at a critical point. The intruding {:3 layer exists in the QI-X surfaces up to the first-order transition, only the {:3 layer is finite in thickness and no longer homogeneous. Above the critical point, the adsorbed layer is created continuously without a transition. (v) The equilibrium thickness of the intruding (:3 layer diverges as [-In(c,,,- co)] as the bulk composition Co of the nonwetting QI-phase approaches the value c a' at which composition it is in equilibrium with the wetting phase (:3 in bulk.

(vi) As a result, the isothermal compositional coefficient of the QI-X surface free energy also diverges as [-In(co- c a )].

we have shown that the isothermal Gibbs adsorption equation is satisfied:

By varying both temperature and composition, it is readily shown that these equations obey the full Gibbs adsorption equation. The discontinuities in the adsorbed layer at the first-order transitions are thermodynamically consistent with discontinuities in first derivatives of a. One consequence of the Gibbs adsorption equation is that under wetting conditions in the vicinity of Co - c a , aalac diverges as -In(c,,, - co) and a (co) - a(c",) varies as - (c", - co)ln(c", - co). For thee phase, r remains finite. Using either classical or modern exponents for Af along the critical isotherm and inserting this into Eq. (13) shows that r is infinite for the critical fluid.

The quantitative results of the present paper are summarized on the schematic Fig. 7 as the surface free energy of the contact between'the x-phase and the fluid near the critical composition. The isocomposition curves are shown to terminate at the saturation temperature. The bulk critical composition is indicated. Compositions corresponding to {:3 are indicated by curves below the critical composition. The curves corresponding to QI lie above the critical composition curve. Close to the critical composition, they develop multilayer adsorption and have infinite slope at saturation, but no discontinuity. The difference between the two saturated surface free energies goes at ATt.3. For compositions further from the critical compOSition, the discontinuity in the isoconcentration curves due to the first-order transition develops. Adsorption at saturation is still infinite. At lower temperatures, the first-order transition terminates at the saturation curve. Below this, there are only finite layer thicknesses and thus finite slopes.

J. Chem. Phys., Vol. 66, No.8, 15 April 1977

(iii) The perfect wetting may terminate in a firstorder transition at some temperature below the critical pOint. Here, two a-x surfaces, one with the intruding layer of (3 and one with ordinary adsorption, have identical free energies, but different temperatures coefficients. A finite contact angle proportional to undercooling below this transition is expected.

[Page 7]

These qualitative results come from such basic causes that they are not altered by changes in the formulation, such as a nonconstant K or other forms of <I> that include allowances for some long-range forces. They clearly do not depend on an analytical J. The simple argument of the introduction leads to perfect wetting whenever u aB approaches zero faster than IU"x-UBxl, whichshould be quite generally true. This same argument can extend to predict the first-order surface transition. Perfect wetting has also been predicted for the three critical phases near the tricritical point. 10 Here all three surface free energies vanish, but in such a way that one surface is replaced by the two others plus the intruding layer. In this theory, it is assumed that the three phases are described by a single composition variable so that any continuous transition between the outer two phases must pass through the middle wetting phase. The validity of this assumption is being examined.

Perfect wetting occurs in the theory of multilayer absorption. 14 Here a solid phase is assumed to exert a long-range attraction for a fluid phase. As a result, the fluid phase condenses from a slightly undersaturated vapor, and the thickness of the condensate as a function of undersaturation is a measure of the strength and range of interaction. In the present work, we have assumed only short-range interaction represented by cpo The predicted thicknesses of (3 were due to the critical pOint effects and not due to long-range interactions with the x-phase. For any phase where the interactions are long-range, the present theory must be modified. Qualitative experimental verification of perfect wetting existed in methylcyclohexane-perfluoromethylcyclohexane system used in our nucleation study. 1,2 Two extraneous phases, glass and vapor, were present. The fluorocarbon-rich phase wets the vapor; the hydrocarbon-rich phase wets the glass. We measured contact angles in the system against both glass and vapor. Within experimental error, they were 0 down to 35 cc, which is 10 cc below the critical temperature. There was no undercooling possible if we started with the fluorocarbon-rich phase, since the hydrocarbon-rich phase formed spontaneously on the glass. Similarly, no undercooling occurred if we started with the hydrocarbon-rich phase in contact with vapor. We studied nucleation from the hydrocarbon-rich phase in sections of U-tubes where no vapor was present. In undersaturated phases, the adsorbed layer at the vapor

A fairly simple experiment demonstrates the different effect of wetting on nucleation in the two phases. It starts with a layered two-phase mixture equilibrated near the critical temperature. On further cooling, both phases become supersaturated. Nucleation begins instantly in one phase all along the container wall while the other phase remains clear until a finite amount of undercooling is reached. This asymmetry of nucleation due to wetting of the container wall should be universal. Others have reported the inability to undercool on one side of the critical composition or density. 15-17 However, Oriani 18 has reported finite undercooling on both sides of the critical temperature in the CCI 4 -C 7 F 14 system. Quantitative measurement of surface free energies is facilitated when the x-phase is also a fluid. This has not been done. No observations exist for the predicted first-order transitions of surface. The thickness transition in soap films is similar and has been well-doumented. 9 Since perfect wetting is not a general phenomenon (except near critical points), we expect perfect wetting to terminate as predicted in at least some systems before crystallization sets in. The expected discontinuities in first derivatives and thickness should be verifiable, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Ronaly B. Heady discovered the perfect wetting and the mechanically detachable layer. He first recognized its implication in the nucleation study. I am indebted to him for much valuable criticism during this study and theoretical development. I have also benefited from generous discussion with Benjamin Widom. This work was supported by NSF Grant No. 7307628-AOI-DMR. I R.

B. Heady, "An Experimental Investigation of Nucleation Theory in a Liquid-Liquid Miscibility Gap," Ph. D. thesis, M. I. T. (1969).

2R • B. HeadyandJ. W. Cahn, J. Chern.

Phys. 58, 896 (1973). 3T homas Young, Phil. Trans. 95, 69 (1805). 4 E . W. Hart, Phys. Rev. 114, 27 (1959). 5J . D. van der Waals, Afdeel. Natuurk. Sec. I (Verh. Koninkl. Akad. Wetenschap, Amsterdam, 1893) or Z. Phys. Chern. 13, 657 (1894). 6J . W. Cahn andJ, E. Hilliard, J, Chern. Phys. 28,

258 (1958).

7H. Sagan, Introduction to Calculus of Variations (McGrawHill, New York, 1969), p. 66. 8S. Fisk and B. Widom, J. Chern. Phys. 50, 3219 (1969). 9C. V. Boys, Soap Bubbles and the Forces which Mold Them (Doubleday, New York, 1959). lOB. Widom, J. Chern. Phys. 62, 1332 (1975). 11 B . Widom, Phys. Rev. Lett. 34" 999 (1975). A criticism of this paper by J. W. Cahn and B. Widom will be submitted. 12A. Skapski, Acta Met. 4, 576 (1956). 13 T . H. Poynting and J. J. Thomson, Textbook of Physics (London, 1913), as cited by Skapski. 14D. Lando and L. J. Slutsky, Phys. Rev. B 2, 2863 (1970). 15R. E. Apfel, J. Chern. Phys. 54, 62 (1971). 16Grayson H. Walker, Clark College (private communications). 17M. R. Moldover (private communications). 18R. A. Oriani, J. Chern. Phys. 25, 186 (1956).

J. Chem. Phys., Vol. 66, No.8, 15 April 1977

Perfect wetting away from critical points is not generally observed. Yet there have been many suggestions that are tantamount to implying that it always occurs for two fluids and a vapor, 11 for a solid, its melt, and vapor. 12 Such general rules are easily disproved by many exceptions. The exceptions were well-documented, but ignored by Antonoff when he proposed his rule. Skapski derived his rule by a mistaken assumption that a theoretical expression he used involved the creation of solid-vapor and liquid-vapor surfaces and the destruction of a liquid-solid surface when it really was for the creation of two liquid-vapor surfaces. 13

surface was so thick that it could be mechanically dislodged, forming droplets that dissolved as they swirled around in the undersaturated liquid.
