[Page 1]

You may also like

KEY ISSUES REVIEWS

From a melt of rings to chromosome territories: the role of topological constraints in genome folding To cite this article: Jonathan D Halverson et al 2014 Rep. Prog. Phys. 77 022601

View the article online for updates and enhancements.

- Performance analysis of parallel de novo genome assembly in shared memory system Syam Budi Iryanto, Wisnu Ananta Kusuma and Heru Sukoco - Characterization of whole mitochondrial genome Amyda cartilaginea from Dharmasraya, West Sumatera A N Munawaroh, L Purnamasari and A Farajallah - African-American responses to the Human Genome Project Fatimah Jackson

[Page 2]

Reports on Progress in Physics Rep. Prog. Phys. 77 (2014) 022601 (24pp)

doi:10.1088/0034-4885/77/2/022601

From a melt of rings to chromosome territories: the role of topological constraints in genome folding Jonathan D Halverson1 , Jan Smrek2 , Kurt Kremer3 and Alexander Y Grosberg2,4

Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973, USA Department of Physics and Center for Soft Matter Research, New York University, 4 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003, USA Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany

E-mail: ayg1@nyu.edu Received 26 May 2013, revised 18 July 2013 Accepted for publication 17 December 2013 Published 28 January 2014 Invited by Paul Chaikin Abstract

We review pro and contra of the hypothesis that generic polymer properties of topological constraints are behind many aspects of chromatin folding in eukaryotic cells. For that purpose, we review, first, recent theoretical and computational findings in polymer physics related to concentrated, topologically simple (unknotted and unlinked) chains or a system of chains. Second, we review recent experimental discoveries related to genome folding. Understanding in these fields is far from complete, but we show how looking at them in parallel sheds new light on both. Keywords: protein folding, DNA, genome, chromatin, genome folding, polymer physics, biological physics (Some figures may appear in colour only in the online journal)

particularly by B. Trask and her co-workers and followers [6, 7, 35–41]. More recently this line of research was continued [23, 24, 42]. Through these and other works, it is understood that the ‘polymer’ in question for genome folding is not naked DNA, but rather the chromatin fiber—a complex of DNA with many proteins (histone complexes) more or less tightly bound to DNA. Its length is smaller than 2 m, but still large enough, on the order of millimeters to centimeters. To imagine the situation, it is useful to increase all scales by a factor of 106 , thus arriving at the necessity to pack and unpack about one hundred kilometers of a regular centimeter-thick rope in and out of a delivery truck. The rope example highlights the role of ‘entanglements’, here loosely understood as all consequences of the fact that two segments of DNA/chromatin cannot cross one another, at least not on their own. While a hundred kilometers of rope will easily fit in a truck considering its bare volume, it

1. Introduction

Each cell of the human body contains about 2 m of DNA (46 molecules, 5 cm long each on average). This much DNA is packed within the cell nucleus with linear dimensions of about five to ten micrometers. How is such an extreme folding achieved? In our view, the natural path to approach the folding of the genome is from a polymer physics perspective. The purpose of the present review is to summarize our recent polymer physics findings [1–5] and review their potential implications for the field of genome folding in light of recent experimental [6–18] and computational achievements [19–27] (see also review articles [28–32]). The very fact that the genome folding problem belongs to the realm of polymer physics was recognized early on,

Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed.

0034-4885/14/022601+24$88.00

© 2014 IOP Publishing Ltd Printed in the UK

[Page 3]

will be hopelessly tangled if randomly packed. Any attempt to pull out or manipulate any particular piece will become almost impossible. Thus, the real problem is not so much the packing itself, but dealing with the entanglements. Meanwhile, tangling is a very generic property of any long ‘polymer’, completely independent of any detail (e.g., spaghetti, rope, wire, fishing line). Thus the chromatin fiber should be in the same class! Meanwhile, the cell has to be able to operate on selected parts of DNA with the transcription factors, RNA polymerase, and all other relevant cell machinery. Roughly speaking, DNA should act pretty much as a RAM (random access memory) device, allowing easy access to any place. Although the view of genome folding as a polymer physics problem seems generally accepted, not much emphasis was placed on the role of topological constraints and entanglements, with the exception of [19, 43, 44]. In [43], the hypothesis of the so-called crumpled globule (later called also fractal or loopy globule) was formulated as a possible resolution to the tangling problem of chromatin. The central idea was the connection between topological simplicity, the lack of knots, and spatial self-similarity. The estimates of the work [44] suggested a limited role of topological enzymes in resolving the conundrum of chromatin tangling. And the work [19], independently of the much earlier work [43], arrived at the conclusion that topological constraints play the central role in the whole of the genome folding problem. In this review, we place topology at the center stage [1, 19, 20, 24–26, 45–48]. Of course, we will build on the significant body of knowledge on polymer topology as described, e.g., in the textbooks [49–52] and even a popular book [53]. Interestingly, polymer topology, as we will see, naturally brings together two aspects of genome folding which were traditionally discussed separately, namely, the polymer physics aspects and the self-similarity aspects. The latter has been discussed many times in the chromatin literature, and there are indications of both a fractal structure in the cell nucleus interior [54–57] and of non-classical diffusion of either particles or the ends of chromatin fiber inside the nucleus [57–77]. We here focus on the attempts to understand these elements of selfsimilarity based on polymer topology. The plan of our review is as follows. We begin section 2 where basic facts and terminology about genome folding is briefly summarized, mostly for a physicist or a chemist reader. The central piece of this primer is table 1 which summarizes quantitative information about genome packing across biological realms. In section 3.1 we formulate the physics view of the subject based on polymer systems with topological constraints. We explain what the topological constraints are and why we believe them to be of decisive importance. We then formulate in section 3.2 the specific workhorse model of our approach, a melt of ring polymers, estimate the relevant polymer parameters of chromatin fiber 3.3.2, and compare chromatin problems to those known in polymer rheology 3.4. The rest of the work presents at least two interweaving streams. The fact of the matter is that although we argue the melt of rings to be a relevant model for chromatin folding, the model itself is by no means completely understood. We,

therefore, combine the review of efforts to understand a melt of rings and related topological polymer models with the review of applications that these polymer ideas find for genome folding. Specifically, section 4 is mostly about the model: we review formulation of the model (4.1), the existing (rather controversial and inconclusive) theoretical approaches (4.2), mathematical space-filling curves (4.3), as well as simulation data for the melt of rings (4.4) and for other related models (4.5). We then move on to compare physics insights against experimental data on chromatin. We begin in section 5 with qualitative observation, namely, chromosome territories (see the original work [8] and the review [28] with its many references, and particularly the very readable account [78]). The center of our argument there is figure 3 which demonstrates how topological constraints on polymers yield a natural simple explanation of territories. With that in mind, we move on in section 6 to quantitative data. We first review in section 6.1 modern experimental methods known under abbreviated names FISH [6, 7, 10, 12, 15, 18, 23, 78–82] and ‘C’ ( [9, 11, 13, 16, 17, 83]; see also the simple summary in [84]). The detailed comparison is performed in section 6.3 for contact probability data and in section 6.4 for subchain sizes. This raises new theoretical questions which we address in section 6.5. We conclude with a brief discussion of dynamics in both chromatin and model polymers in section 7 and the possible role of DNA sequence in section 8. 2. Genome folding: a primer

An overview of the degree of DNA compaction across biological realms is given in table 1. By far the densest packing of DNA is achieved in viruses. However, viruses are very special. First, their genomes are very short. Their DNA (or RNA) is ‘stored’ and nothing happens to it until the virus infects a cell, i.e., its genome unpacks into the cell. The study of viral DNA or RNA, however interesting in its own right (recent reviews and references can be found in [85, 86]), can teach us relatively little about packing of genomes in higher organisms. In prokaryote bacteria cells, biologically the next simplest level, the DNA is located in the so-called nucleoid (see, e.g., [87, 88]) where it appears to be rather loosely associated with proteins. Surprisingly little is known about these proteins and about nucleoid structure in general. However, see the concise review by Gruber [89] and references therein. We will not consider bacterial genomes here, although the main ideas about the role of topology might still be applicable [90]. Cells of higher organisms are called eukaryotic. They have nuclei where DNA is packed in tight association with histones and other proteins. In this work we focus exclusively on eukaryotes. The hierarchical organization of the genome in eukaryotic cells is described in many textbooks and on the web, typically accompanied by beautiful cartoons (e.g. [91–93]). The first level of hierarchy is well established: double stranded (ds) DNA is wound around histone octamers forming so-called nucleosomes. This ‘beads on a string’ chain of nucleosomes is known as the 10 (or 11) nm fiber. A lot is known about this level of organization, including the detailed

[Page 4]

structure of nucleosomes (see the recent summary in [94]) and the stems of their linkers (see, e.g., [95]). A length of dsDNA composed of roughly 147 base pairs is wrapped around a histone octamer in each nucleosome, and segments of roughly 10 to 100 (about 40 in average) base pairs form linkers between these nucleosomes. Whether the position of nucleosomes along DNA and the corresponding linker lengths are random, dictated by the maximal entropy principle of statistical mechanics, or determined by the underlying DNA sequence and form a special code is an extensively studied and hotly debated subject (see, e.g., [96]). The next level of hierarchy is known as the 30 nm fiber. Its existence is easy to understand: since the linker DNA between nucleosomes is shorter than the persistence length (lp ≈ 150 bp), the chain of nucleosomes is expected to form a zig-zag with characteristic width close to 30 nm. The fact of the matter is that such a 30 nm fiber is neither particularly rigid nor very well defined [97], its prominence under in vivo conditions of the cell is doubtful. The idea of its importance seems to be losing popularity [98, 31]. Just above a few tens of nanometers or above 103 base pairs, there is presently a big gap in our knowledge and understanding. A good expression of it is given by Meyer et al [95], who argue for the existence of a cross-over scale. Below that scale the system is pretty rigid, its elements (such as nucleosomes and linkers) can be crystallized, and their structures are fully determined. By contrast, well above this scale fluctuations become important. This is the realm of statistical soft matter physics. In this range, on the scale of about 104 base pairs and higher, the overall architecture of the genome in 3D space is not well understood and its features are only now starting to become known. Our present review is intended to contribute to this process. Thus, our subject matter is the folding of chromatin fiber— an entity which is not perfectly defined. It definitely has the 10 nm fiber at its core, and it may be somewhat more organized. Its physical properties will be discussed below. An indispensable part of the chromatin fiber and its properties is a multitude of different proteins. Some of them are histones, and some of the histones are constituents of nucleosomes. Other histones, such as H1, are attached to linker DNA. Many other non-histone proteins are also involved, such as cohesins and condensins, and despite their suggestive names their function apparently is not restricted to gluing pieces of chromatin fiber together and maintaining the compactness [99, 100] (see also [101]). On the highest level of the nucleus as a whole, chromatin is an important part of many processes through the cell cycle. We here focus on the interphase nucleus, the stage when the cell does not divide and chromosomes stay swollen inside the nucleus. For differentiated cells, some part of DNA, which is not transcriptionally active, is packed somewhat more tightly in so-called heterochromatin. The other part, called euchromatin, is less densely packed and it is involved in transcription of those genes which have to be expressed in the given cell. The genes in heterochromatin are silenced through either histone methylation or interactions with the so-called short silencing RNA (see, e.g., [91]). In either case, the placement of any

particular part of DNA into either hetero- or euchromatin is inheritable via epigenetic mechanisms. Thus, the above mentioned analogy with RAM is restricted to euchromatin only. Nevertheless, for our consideration it is good enough because a significant part of DNA has to be easily accessible for bulky processes such as, e.g., homologous recombination, which would be next to impossible if the DNA were heavily tangled. Of course, genome folding and organization is not a static phenomenon. Cells live, and the cell nucleus is the place of diverse and incessant activities. In this review, we will mostly consider so-called interphase, which is (usually) the longest stage of the cell cycle. During interphase, chromosomes are (relatively) swollen or decondensed and they occupy most of the volume inside the nucleus. In that time, proper genes (i.e. the ones which have to be expressed in the given cell type) are transcribed into RNA for subsequent protein synthesis. It is believed that interphase chromosomes are structurally and spatially organized to help control gene expression. At the end of interphase, the cell prepares itself for division. This process involves a quite dramatic spatial rearrangement and leads to the formation of highly condensed mitotic chromosomes in which transcription appears to be switched off. Our consideration concentrates on interphase chromatin. 3. Polymer physics picture 3.1. Polymer packing and topology

Approaching the polymer physics picture of chromatin folding, we should first realize that chromatin fiber as a polymer is packed fairly densely in the nucleus. The volume fraction of DNA itself in a typical human nucleus is as high as about a percent (with 3.3 billion base pairs in the genome, two copies of the genome in a diploid cell, b = 0.34 nm of length per base pair, double helix diameter of 2 nm, and typical cell nucleus diameter of 10 μm, the volume fraction is 1.2%—see table 1; see also web site [102] and the book [103]). In making such an estimate, one should keep in mind the tremendous variability of biological circumstances. For instance, depending on cell type and conditions, the diameter of a human cell nucleus can easily vary by a factor of 2, from about 6 to 12 μm. This increases the possible DNA volume fraction by almost an order of magnitude, making it as high as about 10%. A more meaningful number, perhaps, would be the volume fraction of the chromatin fibers. Its exact value depends on the exact definition, two of which are given in the last two columns of table 1. Such estimates also vary significantly between different types of cells and different organisms. For instance, the volume fraction of chromatin in simpler eukaryotes such as yeast is twice or more smaller than in humans. As usual in biology, there are many different cases, but it appears that the volume fraction of chromatin is pretty high in all cases. By the standards of polymer physics, chromatin is not quite as dense as a melt, but it is a concentrated solution, which should be thought of as a melt of blobs [49, 51, 52]. Experimentally the properties of concentrated polymer solutions and those of melts are rather

[Page 5]

Table 1. Examples of the amount of DNA and its packing characteristics in several different organisms. ‘Domain’ means where the genome is located, which is the virus capsid in the case of bacteriophages, the cell nucleoid for prokaryotes (bacteria), and the cell nucleus in the case of eukaryotes (exemplified here by yeast, drosophila, chicken, mouse and human), and D is the corresponding diameter. N is the genome length in base pairs. L = bN (e.g. for a virus or for a haploid cell, having one copy of DNA) or 2bN (for a diploid cell, having two copies of DNA) is the contour length of stored DNA, where b = 0.34 nm is the length per base pair. Note that the genome length includes the total length of DNA, i.e. both genes and the non-coding DNA (exons and introns). For instance, yeast and human are very nearly the same as far as the gene length is concerned, but yeast has almost no introns, while we have many, which is why our genome is two orders of magnitude larger. The volume fraction of DNA is calculated by assuming that the DNA double helix is a cylinder of diameter 2 nm and length L, which corresponds to (π/4)(2 nm)2 × (0.34 nm bp−1 ) ≈ 1 nm3 bp−1 . Physically more relevant is the volume fraction of DNA together with tightly bound proteins. For the bacterial nucleoid, such a number is hard to estimate. For eukaryotes, the volume of DNA with histones can be defined in a number of ways. The most conservative estimate is based on mass-spectrometry data which suggest that histones increase the mass (and, given their elementary composition, also the volume) of DNA by about a factor of 2. The most aggressive estimate starts with a typical length of the spacer between nucleosomes as 80 or so which is 30 nm. These spacers are shorter than the persistence length of 150 bp, so roughly the system goes as a zig-zag with nucleosomes at the turns. An upper limit of the excluded volume (virial coefficient) of two such zig-zags can be estimated as that of a cylinder with diameter 30 nm. There are about 200 bp per nucleosome, which corresponds to the distance along the axis of this cylinder of about one nucleosome, which is 10 nm. This yields a volume per one base pair of (π/4)(30nm)2 × [10 nm/200 bp] = 30 nm3 bp−1 , which is a factor of 30 greater than bare DNA. The latter most aggressive estimate is also in agreement with that given in the Supplemental Information of the work [13]. See a more detailed and nuanced discussion of all these numbers on the web site [102] and in the book [103].

Organism

Length of genome, N (bp)

Diameter of domain, D (μm)

L/D

Volume fraction of DNA

Bacteriophage (T4) E. coli Yeast, haploid Drosophila, diploid Chicken, diploid Mouse, diploid Human, diploid

1.7 × 105 4.6 × 106 1.2 × 107 1.5 × 108 1.2 × 109 2.8 × 109 3.3 × 109

0.05

∼103 ∼2 × 103 ∼104 ∼2 × 105 ∼2 × 105 ∼2 × 105

∼50% ∼1% ∼0.3% ∼0.05% ∼4% ∼1% ∼1%

Volume fraction including proteins lower

upper

not applicable not known ∼0.6% ∼10% ∼0.1% ∼1.5% ∼8% ∼100% ∼2% ∼30% ∼2% ∼30%

When speaking of polymer topology, we mean all consequences of the fact that two pieces of a real polymer, such as dsDNA or a chromatin fiber, cannot pass through one another, at least not without special topo-enzymes. For polymers without ends, such as rings, the topological constraints are strict and are topological in the rigorous mathematical sense of the word. For open end polymers, topological constraints are always a matter of time scale. Rosa and Everaers [19] provide rather convincing estimates suggesting that on the time scale of a cell life for higher organisms, topological constraints of a chromatin fiber should be regarded as permanent. At the same time, there are also temporary loops in chromatin fiber every time that two loci come close to one another in space. These contacts and, therefore, loops are detected en masse by ‘C’ experiments (see section 6.1 below). It is important to realize that these loops do not form topological interactions with one another as long as their being a loop (i.e. contact between the ends) is subject to relaxation on the time scale of interest. Important note on terminology: The word ‘topology’ seems to be getting over-used in the field of genome folding (as in many other fields). For instance, people talk about ‘topological domains’ in chromosomes [106]. Our use of ‘topology’ follows the polymer physics tradition and, as we said, means all consequences of the fact that a polymer cannot cross itself. For our workhorse model of polymer rings, topology will have a strict mathematical meaning. Recent experimental work [13] appears to be consistent with the theoretical picture that in the range between 0.5 and 7 million base pairs the chromatin fiber is organized as a

similar without any significant qualitative difference. For both, the catastrophic tangling of long chains, as in equilibrated melts/solutions, always leads to macroscopic relaxation times, which is avoided for chromatin in all cases. In our opinion, this suggests that genome folding should also be considered from a polymer physics perspective. Surely, many aspects of chromatin have very little to do with polymer physics, but one should expect that the very basic motive—being dense while still avoiding tangling—also deserves generic polymer physics considerations. In our opinion, understanding this is presently one of the main challenges of the physics of the cell nucleus. In this context, the most striking observation is that of chromosome territories [8]. This observation is in sharp conflict with the well-established observation for dense and semidilute polymer systems: if chromatin fibers are considered as regular polymer chains then in a dense system, such as a melt or concentrated solution, they should interpenetrate, and entangle if they are in equilibrium. Therefore, already the very fact of territorial segregation between chromosomes is consistent with the idea that chromatin fibers somehow avoid tangling. The hypothesis that DNA in the nucleus might be pretty densely packed while still avoiding catastrophic tangling was formulated almost 20 years ago [43, 104] based on the preceding paper [105], where the idea of the socalled ‘crumpled’ globule was formulated in the context of the dynamics of the coil–globule transition. At about the same time, the role of DNA topology and the corresponding enzymes were also discussed in the work [44]. More recently but independently from [105, 43], the role of DNA topology was strongly advocated by Rosa and Everaers [19].

[Page 6]

note in passing that the idea of approximately defined knots in open strings recently gained popularity in the context of proteins, e.g. [114]). Therefore, we argue that the simplest theoretical model which meets all of the above conditions is a melt of very long unknotted and nonconcatenated rings. This model system mimics the idea of chromatin being (nearly) unknotted and of pretty high concentration in the nucleus. The obvious drawback of rings, namely that they have no ends, is assumed to be of marginal importance for conformations of very long polymers, once they have been prepared in a nonentangled starting configuration. The idea that chromatin, because of the lack of reptation, can be modeled by a system of nonconcatenated rings was first suggested by Rosa and Everaers [19]. They also provided arguments that this approach could explain the phenomenon of chromosome territories. In the same work [19] they simulated very long chains with open ends, with the idea that they more faithfully represent chromatin. The advantage of the ring model is that it allows for clean conclusions to be drawn regarding the role of topological constraints. Unlike for chains with open ends, results are not restricted to times which are orders of magnitude below the equilibration time. This avoids the difficult task of mapping time scales between real and simulated chromatin. The ring model is particularly articulate because conformations within the computer simulation time are fully equilibrated. If the rings display any kind of crumpled globule behavior, this is a strong indication that the driving force to tangle for very long open chains is rather weak and probably not relevant on times typical for interphase chromosomes. Another, easier question is that of density. The DNA is packed in interphase chromosomes at the density of a concentrated solution. In polymer physics such a system is best described as a melt of properly defined blobs (see, e.g., [49, 51, 52]). Although the precise definition of such blobs for chromatin is by no means trivial, we assume that our consideration is performed at the level of blobs, which can be estimated as being not larger than about 300 nm (see below), as suggested by small angle neutron scattering experiments [55]. Thus, we consider a melt or a system where the polymers fill essentially all available space homogeneously. It turns out that such a melt-of-rings-based approach quite directly yields a natural explanation of chromosome territories.

crumpled globule. In fact, the authors of the experimental work [13] prefer to call this state a fractal instead of crumpled globule, which is a pure terminological discrepancy (i.e. fractal and crumpled globule mean exactly the same thing). The experimental work strongly motivated closer theoretical scrutiny. On the one hand, some signatures of a crumpled globule state are visible (particularly visible post factum) in simulation work [19]. On the other hand, the naive original idea of a crumpled globule [43, 105] requires much deeper understanding. The major source of such new understanding over the last few years was computer simulation of both lattice [1, 45] and off-lattice models [46, 2, 3, 25, 26] (see also [4, 5]). Here we will review the status of our understanding of topologically restricted dense polymers and their relevance to genome folding. 3.2. Why melt and why rings?

To demonstrate this relation, we follow our main guiding theoretical idea, namely that topological constraints are bound to play a central role in genome folding and the overall nuclear architecture. This may seem surprising given that DNA in a eukaryotic cell has open ends. However true, open ends do not cancel the topological constraints, because reptation, the leading mechanism of topological relaxation in linear polymers [49, 50], is likely to be suppressed for chromatin. The main reason why reptation is not relevant is because the chromatin fiber is very long. Rosa and Everaers [19] estimate that the reptation time for human chromatin is orders of magnitude longer than the characteristic times of all known cellular processes. Thus, once in a crumpled globule state it would take far too much time to relax into an entangled equilibrium state. Phenomena like these are also discussed in the context of polymer rheology [107, 108]. Furthermore, there are at least two additional factors suppressing reptation of chromatin fibers in the cell nucleus. First, telomere regions at the end of chromosomes [109–112], by virtue of their peculiar sequences which include huge numbers of repeated short motives, are likely to form bulges preventing reptation (similar to the mechanism described by de Gennes [113]). Second, some parts of the chromatin fiber, particularly heterochromatin, are likely to have attachment points to the inner surface of the nuclear envelope (lamina). Also, topological enzymes are likely to play only very limited role for the interphase nucleus, if any (see more details on that in section 5 below). Thus, let us consider the idea that the chromatin fiber cannot cross itself and does not reptate as a working hypothesis. What are the consequences of such an assumption, and how do they compare to the data? The main ingredient of a model must be the large amount (length) of chromatin fiber stored in a restricted volume at high concentration with topological restrictions. We also adopt the hypothesis [43] that the topological state of chromatin in the nucleus is very simple. That is, there is either a complete lack of knots or at most a very few rather simple ones. Although mathematically knots are defined for closed loops only, the concept of knots is still reasonable for very long open strings, such as chromatin. (We

3.3. Physical parameters of chromatin fiber as a polymer

As we Linear density and persistence length. discussed above, chromatin fiber is not perfectly well defined. Nevertheless, to approach its polymer physics we must have some idea about its polymer parameters. Luckily, the cornerstone of polymer physics is the concept of universality [49]: not very many parameters are required to approach the generic properties, such as those related to entanglements. In fact, four parameters are most important: polymer length, persistence length, density and the resulting entanglement length. Let us discuss their estimates. Usually, the genome length N is known in terms of the number of base pairs (see, e.g., table 1). That means,

3.3.1.

[Page 7]

the dsDNA length L is also known, L = bN , where b = 0.34 nm bp−1 . In other words, the ‘linear density’ of the double helix is 1/b which is roughly 3 base pairs per nanometer. The similarly defined ‘linear density’ for the 10 nm fiber is about 20 base pairs per nanometer. The linear density 1/B for chromatin fiber is not known exactly, but experimenters believe it to be above or close to 1/B ≈ 40 bp nm−1 [31]. For example, for the human (diploid) genome of altogether 6.6 × 109 bp, this linear density gives a total length of the chromosome fiber of 6.6 × 109 bp/40 bp nm−1 ≈ 16 cm. The persistence length of bare dsDNA is close to 50 nm, while for chromatin fiber it is difficult to determine accurately. It is certainly longer than that of dsDNA, and the opinions seem to be converging on a number around Lp = 150 nm [31] or Kuhn segment lK = 300 nm. The important fact for our purposes is that chromatin fiber is a flexible polymer on the length scales of our interest and thus can be discussed in terms of the standard theories of dense systems of flexible or semiflexible polymers. Assuming the linear density is known, one can estimate that the chromatin fiber Kuhn segment consists of about lK /B ≈ 12 000 bp = 12 kbp. Another interesting estimate is based on the density of chromatin in a human cell nucleus which is about ρ ≈ 0.015 bp nm−3 (this number corresponds to 6.6 × 109 bp in the volume of a sphere with diameter 10 μm; it is equivalent to 1% DNA volume fraction indicated in table 1, as the volume of one base pair is very close to 1 nm3 ). This corresponds to a number density of Kuhn segments of ρK = ρB/ lK ≈ 8 × 10−6 nm−3 . The dimensionless overlap parameter is then ρK lK3 ≈ 22, a value not unusual for regular synthetic polymers as well. Thus the chromatin pieces overlap strongly on the scale of the persistence length, which supports the picture of a melt/dense solution of flexible polymers. In the usual polymer physics framework, another group of parameters has to do with volume interactions between polymer segments, and includes virial coefficients, excluded volume, Flory χ -parameter, and the like. These parameters are important to determine whether a polymer chain swells or collapses, etc. In our case, the volume behavior of chromatin is controlled by interactions with proteins, including histones and non-histones, such as cohesins and condensins [99–101]. Luckily, we do not have to worry about it, at least to the first approximation, because we assume to know the overall density of chromatin, as discussed above. For a polymer system of a given density, its spatial organization does not depend very much on the mechanism controlling its density, whether it is a proper combination of attractive and repulsive volume interactions or confinement by an outside envelope. We will rely on this approximation. Of course, this is only good for an averaged description, the simplest version of mean field. It does not capture, for instance, the fact that some parts of chromatin fiber can be methylated or acetylated more than others, leading to uneven excluded volume parameters and an uneven density distribution in space. Also, it does not capture active processes, transcription factories, and a myriad of other activities happening in the nucleus. Nevertheless, here we adopt the simplest uniform approximation, which we view as the necessary first step.

As we mentioned previously, our goal is to explore the role of topological constraints. In polymer physics, the known fruitful way to approach this kind of problem is in terms of entanglements. The concept of entanglement is in fact quite subtle. Although it arises from the simple fact that polymers are not phantoms and two pieces of (the same or different) polymers cannot pass through one another, entanglement is fundamentally a many-chain phenomenon. It is very common when two chains may appear not entangled to one another, but they are made entangled by a third chain nearby and so on. Impressively, in the melt√of linear chains of large length N each coil overlaps with ∼ N of other coils, but they collectively manage to create a much larger number of order N of entanglements for the given coil. It is a highly non-trivial result that all these collective effects can be effectively described by a single parameter, namely the entanglement length Le . This parameter characterizes the average chain length such that on smaller length scales topological constraints are unimportant while they dominate on larger length scales. A good way to think about it is to imagine that the chain faces an un-crossable obstacle, on average, once over length Le . Significantly, it may be that the distance between entanglements is small Le < lK or large Le > lK compared to the Kuhn segment. In the former case the chain is nearly straight between the obstacles while in the latter case it is a nearly free coil between obstacles. We cannot possibly do justice to this subject here and refer the reader to textbooks [49–52]. An estimate of the entanglement length, Le , is more involved than that of the previously discussed quantities. In principle, the most direct measurement of Le is usually based on rheology. Without having access to rheological data, we will rely on the large body of knowledge about a variety of polymers, with densities and flexibilities varying by several orders of magnitude [115–119]. Specifically, we will employ the interpolation formula

2/5 Le = lK , (1) + cξ ρK lK3 cξ ρK lK3 3.3.2. Entanglement length of chromatin.

where cξ = 0.06 [119] fits a huge variety of systems ranging from fully flexible polymers to rather rigid semi-flexible systems. Given the uncertainty in our knowledge regarding the linear density, and given also that different cells may have nuclei of different volumes, we can only indicate a range of possible values of Le , as shown in table 2. From our knowledge of synthetic polymers, we tend to expect a realistic value of Le in between the extremes indicated in table 2, perhaps somewhat closer to the lower end, around 300 nm. In summary, one can state that the entanglement length Le of chromatin fibers at conditions typical for a human cell nucleus would most probably be below 500 nm. This holds for most organisms with diploid cells (see table 1). Compared to basic results from polymer theory these systems are deeply in the regime where topological effects dominate all relevant structural and relaxation processes. In this context it is interesting to compare the above estimates to nuclei of other cell types, particularly that of

[Page 8]

Table 2. Estimates of entanglement length for chromatin fiber. The value of the linear density for chromatin fiber is not known very well, while the nucleus diameter can be different from cell to cell. Accordingly, we present the whole spectrum of entanglement length estimates. In all cases the calculations are done using formula (1) for entanglement length Le , while the number of base pairs between entanglements is calculated as Ne = Le /B. The case 1/B = 120 bp nm−1 and D = 10 μm was used by Rosa and Everaers [19]. The Kuhn segment was assumed to be lK = 300 nm.

Linear density

D = 5 μm

D = 10 μm

D = 15 μm

= 40 bp nm−1

Le = 0.1 μm Ne = 4 kbp Le = 0.15 μm Ne = 12 kbp Le = 0.2 μm Ne = 24 kbp

Le = 0.35 μm Ne = 14 kbp Le = 0.7 μm Ne = 56 kbp Le = 1.3 μm Ne = 156 kbp

Le = 1.6 μm Ne = 64 kbp Le = 5 μm Ne = 400 kbp Le = 11 μm Ne = 1320 kbp

= 80 bp nm−1 = 120 bp nm−1

yeast. Not only is the total length of the genome much smaller, more importantly, the density in the nucleus is about a factor of three smaller, see table 1 (while for chicken nuclei it is larger). It has a total length of 1.2 × 107 base pairs in altogether 32 chromosomes. On average each chromatin fiber thus contains only 137 000 base pairs. Assuming the same chromatin fiber structure for yeast as for human diploid cells, which probably will only be very approximate, one arrives at about 40 μm total contour length divided among 32 chromatin fibers. Considering the reduced density, the average total contour length per fiber is only a few times more than or even close to Le . Thus for yeast, topology effects are expected to be very weak.

become much longer. Rastogi et al [122] studied the processing properties of a polymer melt, which was created upon melting a dense agglomeration of polymer crystallites, each of them containing only one single, but very long chain. They observed a significant reduction in the apparent, transient viscosity compared to an entangled melt of otherwise identical properties. Indeed, studying the relaxation of a melt of compact globules into an entangled melt revealed a rapid expansion for short chains and a very slow process for very long chains (bN ⩾ O(50Le )) [107]. This phenomenon can be understood in terms of the elastic distortion due to ‘non-cooperative’ reptation [108]. That is, the reeling out of chain ends into the surrounding chains creates an elastic deformation of globules, making the relaxation process very slow. For nonconcatenated rings that would require reeling out of doubly folded pieces, which are subject to an additional entropy penalty. Unfortunately there is no systematic study of this phenomenon so far. Despite this, these results indicate that for the diploid cells of higher organisms no complicated biochemical apparatus is required to keep the chromosomes segregated on the biologically relevant time scales once they are ‘prepared’ in a territorial arrangement.

3.4. A physical analogy: rheology of non-entangled melts

It is instructive to relate the above analysis to known results from polymer chain dynamics and rheology. Rosa and Everaers [19] have argued that the dynamics of chromosomes in the cell nucleus are orders of magnitude slower than all known biological processes. Based on the reptation concept, they estimate the overall relaxation time in such a system to be well above the average life time of a human being. In contrast the overall relaxation time of a melt of nonconcatenated rings is much smaller than that of an entangled melt of linear chains, as we will see below [3]. Considering the stability of chromosome territories, the specific question is whether there is a strong tendency to entangle, which then would need specific measures to be prohibited, or whether such a tendency does not exist. As already mentioned, one expects a pressure difference p in a computer simulation between a melt of nonconcatenated rings and a melt of linear polymers of the same chain length and density. This is because of the different number of degrees of freedom and of the topological constraints. p, however, has not been detected so far. Though too small to be detected, the total free energy increase per chain compared to a melt, roughly kB T b3 pN with N being the number of repeat units per chain, can be quite large. Switching off the topological constraints would lead to a very fast relaxation of the polymer globules toward Gaussian conformations through an isotropic expansion of the polymers. Indeed for linear chains of length up to several Le this holds true [107, 120, 121], even though chain connectivity and non-crossability are fully maintained. This rapid relaxation does not occur, when the chains

4. Melt of rings and related polymer models 4.1. Model and question formulation

Understanding the conformational geometry and statistics of nonconcatenated rings in the melt turned out to be an unexpectedly difficult challenge [123]. To emphasize the generic character of the problem, even beyond the previous discussion, and its independence of any chemical or microscopic details, it is useful to start with a purely mathematical formulation. Imagine a piece of cubic lattice in space with number of nodes K 1 occupied by M closed loops or rings of N steps each, leading to N M = K. In this case, space is completely filled which corresponds to the melt assumption where each blob occupies a node giving a volume fraction φ = 1. Importantly, we assume that each ring is unknotted and rings are not concatenated. Furthermore, no node is occupied more than once. This is the description of the simplest model of a concentrated set of unknotted and nonconcatenated rings, the subject of our attention. Of course, this system can

[Page 9]

be considered off-lattice, and can be equipped with further details. The main issue, however, is the interplay between conformations and packing of homogeneously space-filling polymers, i.e. φ ≃ 1, and topological constraints of being unknotted and nonconcatenated. Here is a list of simple questions with regard to the statistical properties of this model, and which are most closely related to the experimental data being collected by methods such as FISH and 3C:

The second contribution to the entropy is estimated as follows: if every ring has size of order R and, therefore, lives in a volume R 3 , while its own volume is only about ∼N b3 (assume for simplicity that the chain thickness is governed by the same length scale b), then about R 3 /N b3 different rings cohabit one and the same volume. If we assume that every one of these rings forces our chosen ring to loose entropy of order unity, then we arrive at the following estimate of the overall free energy: N b2 R3 ∼ 2 + , (6) kB T N b3

• How does the spatial extension (e.g., averaged gyration radius) of a ring squeezed between others depend on the ring length N ? We expect the dependence to be a power law: (2) Rg2 ∼ N 2ν .

where kB T is temperature in energy units. Minimization with respect to R yields the result (5). Surely, this argument is very much open to criticism, much more so than the similarly looking classical Flory theory of a coil in good solvent. For instance, the first term assumes the rings to be Gaussian and neglects that the ring itself is unknotted. In reality, the free unknotted ring is swollen [125], thus its statistics are not Gaussian for topological reasons. Therefore, entropy loss due to compression is larger and grows faster with decreasing R. The second term in equation (6) is even more problematic. It is not clear at all why every one of the cohabiting rings produces an entropy loss of order unity. One can try to improve this estimate by assuming, for instance, that the osmotic pressure of surrounding rings is a many-body type of phenomenon such that the corresponding free energy scales as (R 3 /N b3 )α with some properly chosen power α (see [124]). Instead of formula (5) and index 2/5, such an approach yields index ν = (1 + α)/(2 + 3α), which can be anything in the interval 2/5 > ν > 1/3 depending on α. Of course, this only emphasizes the physically unjustified character of the estimate. Nevertheless, the very idea of a proper balance of entropy losses due to intra- and inter-ring contributions behind equation (6) deserves serious attention as a basis for possible future improvements. One noteworthy attempt of such improvement was undertaken by Sakaue [126, 127]. It is also based on minimization of free energy for a test ring, qualitatively similar to equation (6) in the sense that there is one term which favors compression because the test ring looses entropy by making long loopy protrusions among surrounding rings, and there is another term which disfavors compression because the loss of entropy of the test ring itself. In such a general form, the idea is undoubtedly correct. Such concepts are well known, as for instance discussed for the case of gels in [128]. Both terms were estimated in [126, 127] in a more involved way compared to [124], but the estimates rely upon some rather ad hoc assumptions. In the end, the suggested variational free energy reads

N 3 b6 R3 + ∼ ln 1 − , (7)

kB T R6 b3 N Ñe

The index ν defines whether rings can form territories (ν = 1/3 for spatial dimension d = 3) or not (ν > 1/3). • How does the size of the subchain (e.g., its gyration radius or end-to-end Euclidean distance) r(s) depend on the subchain arc length s. We expect it to be governed by the same index ν at sufficiently large s, so that r(s) ∼ s ν . • What is the probability P (s) that two monomers separated by arc length s will be in contact in space? Again we expect this contact probability, or loop factor, to follow a power law in s, with a power γ , where the relation to ν is at least not clear: (3) P (s) ∼ s −γ . • How many monomers of one ring are in contact with monomers of other rings? How many monomers of a subchain are in contact with other subchains? We expect this fraction of a ring, which could be called ‘surface’ or easily accessible fraction, to be governed by another exponent β: (4) nsurf ∼ N β . There is also a separate set of questions regarding the dynamics of rings in concentrated systems (see section 7 below), but for now we concentrate on the equilibrium statistics in relation to chromatin experiments. 4.2. Theoretical approaches Flory type theories. A significant step was the work of Cates and Deutsch [124], who considered a melt of nonconcatenated rings and arrived at the prediction that the size of a ring scales as

4.2.1.

R ∼ bN ν ,

where

ν = 2/5.

(5)

Their approach follows a classical Flory theory of regular polymers with excluded volume and makes the argument that the equilibrium size of the ring is determined by the balance of two factors: entropy loss of the ring itself when it gets more compact than its preferred Gaussian size, and entropy loss due to the topological constraints with the surrounding rings if the ring size increases by protruding loop-like ‘tentacles’. The first factor is estimated as N b2 /R 2 , where N is the number of monomers in the ring, while R is the ring size to be determined, and b is a microscopic length scale such as the Kuhn segment.

where numerical coefficients of order unity are all dropped out, but the entanglement length Ñe is defined in a peculiar non-standard way, different from the usual definition by a factor of about 2 or more. This suggested form of the free energy automatically requires that very long rings in a melt

[Page 10]

are compact, because R asymptotically is growing faster than N 1/3 , making the argument in the log eventually negative. However, if we assume Ñe 1, then on the way to the final asymptotics R ∼ N 1/3 Ñe , valid for N Ñe , the free energy (7) predicts a region of intermediate asymptotics R ∼ N 4/9 Ñe valid at Ñe N 1 (the latter result is not mentioned in [126, 127], but can be derived from the free energy (7)). Although this theory involves many poorly justified assumptions, it does capture the existence of a relatively wide cross-over region, with seeming power 4/9 which is close to the 2/5 result of Cates and Deutsch (5). An important aspect of free energy estimates, such as equation (6) or (7) is that they represent a small, but decisively important, correction to the very large contribution from repulsive forces of interaction between monomers at high density. These corrections are decisive because they depend on R and their structure is determined by the topological constraints, such as absence of knots in any particular ring and absence of links for any group of rings. For instance, there is no doubt that the osmotic pressure of a concentrated system of nonconcatenated rings is larger than that of a similarly concentrated system of linear chains (for large N and at the same density). However, this correction is so small, compared at the dominant term produced by excluded volume interactions between monomers, that none of the presently available simulations is sensitive enough to detect it, as previously mentioned.

of justification goes back to the well-established fact of topological repulsion between nonconcatenated rings. For instance, the second virial coefficient of two nonconcatenated rings in dilute solution is close to Rg3 and is practically independent, at least in the scaling sense, of the real excluded volume of monomers [129] (see also the recent work [24] and references therein). Nevertheless, the concept of the crumpled globule remains a hypothesis. Furthermore, we should emphasize that all three aspects mentioned above need careful attention: although the simulations in [13] do confirm the formation of a crumpled globule upon fast chain collapse, it is not proven that this scenario is valid for all mechanisms of squeezing (e.g., by external field, by poor solvent, etc). It is likely but not proven that an equilibrium collapsed ring is a fractal. Additionally, it is not clear that rings squeezed in the melt form the same type of fractal as single collapsed rings, simply because the surface of a collapsed globule is very rough in the former case while smooth and dominated by surface tension in the latter. The most likely possibility is that all of these systems are crumpled globules of somewhat different kinds, but this remains to be properly understood. An attempt to understand the nature of crumpled globules more deeply faces serious mathematical challenges [130, 131]. A direct computational test of the hypothesis that the typical conformation of a collapsed chain without knots is a crumpled fractal globule was attempted in the work [132]. For that purpose, Hamiltonian walks (i.e., lattice conformations which fill every site of a given lattice segment once and only once) were generated on cubic segments of a cubic lattice up to the size of 14 × 14 × 14. A rather clear tendency toward segregation of subchains was observed, but the length of the polymer was insufficient to arrive at conclusive results. The question of the long-term stability of crumpled structures was recently addressed by simulation [133]. For the particular crumpled conformations which were used as initial conditions, long-term stability was not observed. Interestingly, conformations that are similar to crumpled are implicated in certain scenarios of active (ATP dependent) formation of chromatin structures, by so-called loop-extruding enzymes [134].

Another possible idea regarding rings in the melt is based on the convolution of three hypotheses. The first hypothesis assumes that the fast collapse of a single polymer chain upon abrupt solvent quality quench produces a peculiar state, called crumpled globule [105]. This state is dense, self-similar, and free of knots and should have β = 2/3. The second (least proven) hypothesis is that this state of a crumpled globule is equilibrium for any isolated chain collapsed in a poor solvent with the constraint that knots are excluded, for instance, for an unknotted ring. The third hypothesis suggests that a ring squeezed by its neighbors in the melt and a ring collapsed in a poor solvent should be similar and, therefore, both should be crumpled globules. This latter hypothesis will be especially questioned by the simulations. Thus, the idea is that a crumpled globule results when the polymer is forced to adopt a compact conformation without knots, whether the lack of knots is an imposed topological condition, as in a ring, or it results from slowness of reptation, as in rapid collapse (where collapse should be viewed as ‘rapid’ if it occurs faster than the relevant relaxation time scale; in practice, it may still be rather slow by conventional standards). According to arguments developed in [105], the signature of a crumpled globule is that every subchain of sufficient length s is collapsed in itself, and has the size of order ∼bs 1/3 . In other words, r(s) ∼ s ν with ν = 1/3, (8)

4.2.2. Crumpled, or fractal, globule.

Lattice animal model. Although the intent of the above approaches is to describe the restriction of accessible conformations due to the topological constraints, the topology is present there only indirectly. In general, theoretical ideas about polymer topology revolve around the idea of an effective tube suggested originally for networks [135] and most widely known in the context of reptation [49–53]. Tubes and reptation ideas, unfortunately, have no direct applicability for nonconcatenated rings. Since the tube is a sort of ‘topological mean field’, a similar idea for the melt of rings is a ring squeezed into a lattice of obstacles, just like in the very first work of Edwards [135]. That means, we should imagine placing one ring into a lattice of immobile, un-crossable, and infinitely long straight spikes such that the ring is not tangled to the lattice, i.e., it must be topologically possible to take the ring out of the lattice. This model was examined in the works

4.2.3.

which is assumed to be true at s > smin with smin ∼ Ne . That also means the chain itself, on the scale beyond the entanglement length Ne , has fractal dimension 3. The idea

[Page 11]

[136–139]. The conformation of a ring in such a lattice is well understood, it represents a so-called lattice animal, i.e., the ring double-folds along an annealed branched structure. The description of this system is mathematically beautiful [130], and it is undoubtedly correct for a single ring in the lattice of obstacles. The applicability of a lattice of obstacles and annealed branched structure in the self-consistent situation of many rings is not obvious. It is a difficult computational task, so far unresolved, to check for such structures in the computationally generated conformations of rings. The difficulty arises from the fact that branches, if they are real, exist only on a scale significantly larger than Ne . This motivates the idea to assume the existence of such an annealed branched structure, examine the consequences of the assumptions, and compare them with computational data. Such an attempt was undertaken by one of us (AYG) in the recent work [140], and the results are rather encouraging. First, this logic yields a rather straightforward proof that ν = 1/3, i.e. every ring collapses onto itself and different rings form territories. Interestingly, the backbone of a branched lattice animal inside its territory behaves like a self-avoiding random walk. That means the backbone length L is estimated from the condition L3/5 ∼ N 1/3 (ignoring here Ne ; see [140] for details). This result may seem counterintuitive because the backbone is a polymer and normally self-avoidance is screened under melt conditions [49–52]. The fact of the matter is that the screening effect in our case is exactly compensated by the unusually large excluded volume, as it is controlled by the side chains of the branched structure. And the distribution of material between the backbone and the side branches in the annealed system is self-consistently determined so as to establish the selfavoiding statistics. These ideas also shed light on other critical exponents for the system, such as the surface exponent β and the contact exponent γ . It turns out that this γ is related to the ‘other γ ’, which we denote here γusual , and which controls the number of conformations for a polymer [49]. This relation explains why our index γ cannot be computed by any analog of Flory theory, and, more generally, why finding this index is a very difficult task. The lattice animal model was also used in the work [21] to model chromosomes directly on a phenomenological level, and we return to this later in section 4.5. This completes our discussion of the rather unsettled situation of theoretical concepts aimed at describing the overall size of the rings, or the index ν (2). Apart from the very recent attempt [140], no theory we are aware of goes beyond ν to address contact probabilities, subchain surfaces, and other more detailed conformational properties which are described by an independent set of exponents which we call β and γ , as defined in equations (3) and (4).

Figure 1. Closed Hilbert space-filling curves, called Moore curves, shown in the first four steps of generation. Both ends are next to each other on the lattice, which is why the curve can be considered as a closed loop. The polymer in every case is colored in the rainbow order from one end to the other. This allows one to clearly see the ‘territorial segregation’ between subchains.

examples include the Hilbert curve and its closed loop (with two ends connected) version called Moore curve (shown in figure 1), as well as Sierpinski, Lebesgue, and Gosper curves. For a modern review of this topic, including computer algorithms to generate these curves, see the book [141]. See also [142] for some more recent unexpected applications of space-filling curves in data sorting and parallelization of computer algorithms. Space-filling curves are usually constructed via recursive algorithms, and, in the limit, they are true self-similar fractals. Of course, unlike in the mathematical literature where the nature of the limit is the central aspect, for our purposes we only need a high, but finite level of iteration. In this sense, for instance, the 3D Hilbert or Moore curves in figure 1 represent true fractal globules: they are unknotted and self-similar by construction. Classical curves, such as Peano, Hilbert, Moore and Sierpinski space-filling curves, are characterized by pretty smooth surfaces between neighboring folds, which corresponds to β = 2/3 in 3D (or more generally β = (d−1)/d in d-dimensional space). As we will show below, this yields γ = 4/3 (or γ = (d +1)/d). In the context of chromatin models, the natural question is this: is smoothness of surfaces, expressed by the value β = 2/3, an inherent property of regular space-filling curves? Recently, two of us (JS and AYG) answered this question by explicitly constructing the entire novel family of fractal unknotted space-filling curves with very wiggly surfaces [143]. A 2D example of such a curve is shown in figure 2. In fact, there are curves with index β arbitrarily close to unity from below (and consequently γ arbitrarily close to unity from above). Lieberman-Aiden mentioned to one of us (AYG) a similar result of his own [144]. Of course, the existence of one or a few fractal spacefilling curves with various surface roughness (values of β) does not mean that there are enough conformations of this type to provide sufficient entropy and to make the state thermodynamically competitive. In this sense the crumpled globule as a thermodynamic (macro)state is still a hypothesis, and the entropically (or probabilistically) dominant values of β and γ for a randomly chosen conformation are still not known.

4.3. Peano type space-filling curves and mathematical hypothesis

4.4. Simulation data for the melt of rings

Good realizations of crumpled globule conformations are well known in mathematics as space-filling curves. The most widely known example is the Peano curve in 2D. Other

The most detailed simulation results on the melt of unknotted nonconcatenated rings are presented in the works [1] using the Monte Carlo method for a lattice model and in back-to-back

[Page 12]

exhibits an unexpectedly wide cross-over region between Gaussian behavior Rg ∼ N 1/2 at the distance smaller than the entanglement length N < Ne and asymptotic behavior at very large N . In this cross-over region one expects the intermediate asymptotics close to the estimate of equation (5) Rg ∼ N 2/5 or N 4/9 , see equation (7). The comparison between different simulation models in terms of looking at their number of entanglements, N/Ne , was justified for linear polymers in [117–119]. This approach appears fruitful also for the rings. In a recent paper [4] it was shown how the data of many very different simulations collapse on a single master curve when plotted as Rg2 (N )/Rg2 (3Ne ) against N/3Ne (the factor 3 was introduced for historical reasons). This universal master dependence is observed over a very wide range: 0.1 < N/Ne < 150. It is this dependence that exhibits a very wide cross-over and eventually approaches the N 1/3 scaling. When this paper was already written, a new simulation work appeared [149]. In that article, the molecular dynamics simulation results for the melt of unconcatenated rings is generally in very good agreement with our simulations [2]. Additionally, the authors show that simulation results for the melt of rings are in quantitative agreement with more efficient simulations of lattice systems of annealed branched objects coarse grained above the Ne scale. This gives more credence to the idea of the annealed lattice animal representation, discussed above (section 4.2.3). This is also highly promising in terms of simulating the larger systems. Ostensibly an N 1/3 scaling indicates that different rings are segregated from one another. A closer look at the data indicates that despite the scaling of a compact object Rg ∼ N 1/3 for very large N , the rings do not look at all like smooth rounded globules. By contrast their shapes are very irregular, and their surfaces are very rough. In what follows we will pay major attention to the characteristics of this roughness and the attempts to relate it to the properties of chromatin.

Figure 2. A 2D example of a space-filling curve with large fractal dimension of inter-territorial boundaries. First (top) and second (center) steps of generation of the curve. Two magnified sections of the second step are shown at the bottom. Coloring of the polymer in rainbow order from one end to the other enables one to see ‘territorial segregation’ and the rough surfaces between subchains.

papers [2, 3] using off-lattice molecular dynamics. These data along with other available simulation results [145–148] are summarized in [4, 5]. We do not attempt to repeat here all of the many results, but the main outline can be formulated as follows. Much effort went into the proper equilibration of the samples, and convincing evidence was accumulated to claim that equilibration was achieved. For the lattice model, rings up to N = 5000 were considered (N = 10 000 were not fully equilibrated) whereas for the off-lattice systems it was done for rings up to N = 1600. In the former case, the entanglement length Ne [49–53] was found to be Ne ≃ 175 versus Ne ≃ 28 in the latter case. Therefore, in terms of the number of entanglements per chain the achieved lengths were roughly comparable: N/Ne up to about 30 for lattice systems (and 60 incompletely equilibrated) and up to about 57 for the off-lattice case. In both the lattice and off-lattice systems, the overall ring size, measured by either Re , the distance between beads N/2 apart along the ring, or Rg , approaches with increasing N an asymptotic behavior which seems consistent with Rg ∼ N 1/3 . At the same time, the dependence Rg (N )

4.5. Simulation of other models with topological constraints

In the context of chromatin modeling, rings are only a tool. Their advantage is that the model is very cleanly formulated, allowing us to achieve very solid unambiguous results. The alternative approach is to simulate very long chains with open ends, following the logic that real chromatin fibers appear to have their ends available. Two groups followed this approach [19, 20, 46], as we also discuss below. They prepared initial conformations of long linear worm-like chains in the form of a pretty densely packed and definitely unknotted zig–zag conformation, confined to a thick cylinder. The overall shape was chosen to approximately match the shape of specific chromosomes (human chromosome 4 and drosophila chromosome 2L) in their condensed metaphase state. Then they placed the initial polymers into a box with periodic boundary conditions and followed the slow relaxation of the conformations. They intentionally examined only times shorter than the overall relaxation of the whole system, under the presumption that time scales were matched to biological ones and, therefore, one should not worry what happens on

[Page 13]

the time scale longer than the cell cycle. More recently they introduced defects or kinks into their worm-like chain model in order to better reproduce the observed contact probability behavior [46]. A rather different type of simulation was reported in the work [13] (particularly in its supplemental material) alongside experimental data. In that work, authors started from a coil conformation of a discrete worm-like chain and then forced it to collapse rapidly under the action of a steadily narrowing ‘potential well’ acting on every monomer a distance r from the mass center of the chain as φ(r) = kB T exp[R0 (r − R0 )/6]. R0 was adjusted at every Monte Carlo step to 0.7Rmax , where Rmax is the instantaneous maximal distance from the center of mass to any of the monomers. This strong confinement leads to a very fast collapse. Once the desired density was reached, R0 was fixed and a standard MC simulation of a freely jointed chain with excluded volume was performed. The resulting conformation appeared to be a beautiful fractal globule with very well pronounced territorial segregation of different parts and virtually no knots despite open ends. The contact probability was found to decay as 1/s, which is very close to that observed experimentally. Notice that this algorithm forces the chain to collapse on a time scale significantly faster than the conformational relaxation. One of the truly interesting results of these kind of simulations, compared to those with rings where the conformations are fully equilibrated, is that the conformations are rather similar, although maybe not identical. A more recent simulation study using the same model appears to indicate an unexpectedly speedy relaxation of this fractal structure. The interpretation of these findings and their association with chain length in relation to powers of Ne and other relevant factors will have to wait until after the details of the work are made available. Yet another model was simulated in the work [21]. It does not involve topological constraints explicitly, instead the authors simulated an annealed branched structure, similar to that described earlier for rings in section 4.2.3 and in the works [140, 150, 151]. As in [13], the model [21] involves chain compression in real space, but an additional ad hoc assumption is a similarly strong compression of the ‘generation number’ (number of branches).

emerges as published on the back cover of Physics Today [45]. This is illustrated in figure 3. We want to emphasize that no segregation, no territories are observed in the system of linear polymers. This fact is known in polymer physics as the Flory theorem [49], and it is also illustrated by the lower panel in figure 3. Thus, we see that topological constraints in a concentrated system of long polymers lead to territorial segregation. This leads to the hypothesis that chromosomes do not intermix, do not tangle, and remain distributed over their respective territories mostly because of their topological constraints [1, 19]. This idea was also suggested in the works [47, 48], where it was based directly on the topological repulsion of nonconcatenated loops in a dilute system, without any attention to the compact packing issue. The role of topological constraints was also emphasized in the experimental work [14]. The initial formation of territory-like regions is also observed in computer simulations and to a certain extent by scattering experiments of polyelectrolyte gels and solutions [152–155]. Upon change in solvent quality or counterion valency the systems start to shrink by chain contraction. This is facilitated by counterion condensation along the backbone of the chains leading to complexes, which still contain a (decreasing) net charge. At the early stages of this process the so-called pearl necklace structure is observed. Consequently these dense regions still repel each other, i.e. they stay segregated. For perfect gels without any dangling chain ends this segregation state seems to survive up to melt densities, while solution studies of (short) linear polymers suggest a relaxation into the Gaussian chain conformation once the density is sufficiently high that the counterions are no longer localized on the backbone and can diffuse freely throughout the melt or solution. It is worth emphasizing the important differences in approach between [1, 2, 19] and the simulation part of [13]. In [1, 2], a system of rings was considered to enforce topological constraints. This system was carefully equilibrated. That is, the authors made sure that the entropically dominant or statistically most probable set of conformations was observed and studied. By contrast, the authors of [19] simulated (mostly) long linear chains for a pre-reptation time, therefore, not even attempting to equilibrate their system. What they have done instead is to take advantage of having mapped the parameters of the simulated model onto those of a real chromatin fiber. Accordingly, they were able to argue that their molecular dynamics run was over a biologically reasonable amount of time over which the interphase stage of the cell cycle exists in nature. These authors showed also that their results for linear chains on a pre-reptation time were similar to those of the rings. It is interesting to realize that some sort of territorial segregation was observed in three rather different simulation schemes. In [19] the authors start with compact unknotted crumpled-like polymers and run the simulation much shorter than the reptation time. In the simulation part of [13] the authors start from a very open coil conformation, force it to collapse very fast, and then run it for a short time. While in [1, 2] dense systems of rings were equilibrated, which is

5. ‘Territorial polymers’ and chromosome territories: qualitative aspect

As we already mentioned, mutual segregation or the incomplete penetration of rings provides a simple generic natural explanation of chromosome territories [8, 28, 78]. As a matter of fact, territorial segregation of chromosomes was seen also in HiC data [13]. But the most obvious view of territories was described in [8, 28, 78]. Recall that the microscopic image of an interphase nucleus, where each chromosome is stained a distinct color, looks like a political geographic map [8] or contiguous set of colorful patches with irregular shapes, covering space (see also the reviews [28, 78]). In this sense, the melt of rings exhibits a very similar behavior. If each ring is colored in its own distinct color then something of a map

[Page 14]

to say it could be run indefinitely long. The similarity in the results of these three very different systems is a powerful demonstration of the validity of the very idea that topological constraints are the key to segregation. This idea is also supported by the study undertaken in a different context by Vettorel and one of us (KK) [107]. In that work, the authors simulated melts of long collapsed polymers and found that relaxation into the entangled state is significantly delayed to times larger than the reptation time once the chain lengths reach of the order of about 50Le . As shown above, typical chromatin fibers exceed this length significantly. We should repeat here the arguments why we think topological constraints to be so important for the chromatin fiber. Of course, the chromatin fiber is not a ring. Nevertheless, un-crossability is likely to play a huge role. The simplest argument is that the cell life time is by far not sufficient to realize complete relaxation via reptation [19, 44]. Also, telomere regions at the ends of chromosomes are likely to form bulges which are not conducive for reptation. The additional factor which slows down the reptation is that the chromatin fiber is probably attached in some places to the nuclear envelope (its inner surface). If that is the case then regular reptation becomes problematic and the situation becomes reminiscent of star-branched macromolecules, where the relaxation time is controlled by the arm retraction mechanism and is exponentially long [51]. We should also comment here about the role of topological enzymes (topoisomerase) which are capable of cutting both strands of dsDNA, passing another piece of DNA through the cut, and then gluing the cut back together. This seems to make dsDNA effectively phantom or self-crossable [44]. Simple estimates show, however, that the amount of enzymes in the nucleus and ATP (free energy) supply in the cell is by far insufficient to forget about topological enzymes. Nevertheless, this subject remains somewhat controversial in the literature, as emphasized recently, e.g., by Schiessel et al [133]. Sure enough, topoisomerase enzymes play their role, but mostly in the metaphase. In fact, apparently there is no indication of topoisomerase activity during the interphase [156]. In any case, the activity of topological enzymes does not cancel the fact that to the first approximation the chromatin fiber is not crossable [19]. Thus, it is sensible to hypothesize that instead of using the sophisticated machinery of topological enzymes to make many random crossings, nature would make good use of polymer un-crossability to control territorial segregation. Territorial segregation of chromatin fibers appears to be a common feature of higher eukaryotes, including humans. Lower eukaryotes, such as yeast seem to have much less pronounced territories, or no territories at all [78, 83, 157]. Given the relatively short genome of yeast (see table 1), this observation is at least qualitatively consistent with our above estimates of the number of entanglement lengths of the yeast genome. It is interesting to mention that yeast has about as many genes (and about as large genes) as humans. In other words, the amount of coding DNA is nearly the same for both yeast and human. However, yeast has almost no introns while we have plenty. This is why human DNA is two orders of magnitude longer than that of yeast.

Figure 3. Upper image: Experimental image of chromosome territories in a fibroblast cell nucleus. Image reproduced with author’s permission from [158]. This is a false color representation of all of the chromosome territories visible in the mid-section of the nucleus. Middle image: territorial segregation in the model system of nonconcatenated unknotted rings. The system in this image consists of 200 rings of 1600 monomers each. Lower image: to sharpen the statement that territorial segregation results from topological constraints, we show here a system of 400 linear chains of 800 monomers each. As the image demonstrates, the linear chains mix completely, without any hint of segregation or territories. This mixing is achieved via reptation and it is behind the Flory theorem in polymer physics [49]. The middle and lower images resulted from molecular dynamics simulation of an off-lattice model (see [2] for details of the simulation and model).

[Page 15]

Since the qualitative picture of political maps agrees rather well for the model system of a melt of rings and for real chromosomes in cell nuclei, it makes sense to look at more details for both cases.

6.2. Mean field relation between subchain size r(s) and loop factor P (s)

For any fractal conformation with the subchain size scaling as r(s) ∼ bs ν , the loop factor can be estimated by the following argument. Let us imagine that we hold one end of the subchain fixed in space. The second end is located at a distance of about r(s), i.e., it is dispersed over the volume of the order of r 3 (s). Therefore, the probability, P (s), to find it in a small volume v ∼ b3 around the first end is estimated as

6. ‘Territorial polymers’ and chromosome territories: quantitative considerations 6.1. Modern experimental techniques of chromatin investigation

P (s) ≃ v/r 3 (s).

In recent years, quantitative experimental information about chromatin organization in space was delivered mostly by two groups of methods, called ‘FISH’ and ‘3C’ with derivatives up to HiC. Recall that FISH basically measures r(s), the subchain size, while HiC measures P (s), the loop factor or contact probability. We will discuss these results in greater detail below in this section, but it is useful to remind briefly the basic ideas behind these two methods. The essence of the FISH method [82] is to label a few loci on the genome with small fluorescent molecules. The spatial distance of the fluorescing spots is then measured under a microscope. Recent advances in microscopy increase the resolution significantly beyond the wavelength of the light used (see, e.g., [15, 18]). By doing this for many pairs of loci, one can—ideally—relate the genetic distance between the loci s or, in polymer physics parlance, the contour distance between the monomers to their spatial Euclidean distance r(s) [7, 10, 12, 15, 18, 79–81, 159]. The central idea of the ‘C’ methods is to chemically crosslink at some particular time pieces of the chromatin fiber which happen to be close to each other in space at that very moment. Then the DNA is chopped into pieces by a restriction enzyme, and (omitting important technical details here!) the parts which happened to be cross-linked are sequenced. Cross-linking is usually realized by formaldehyde which connects histones, but not DNA. Thus the cross-linking acts on the level of the 10 nm fiber, not on the level of DNA. The cross-linked parts are then separated, for instance, in the HiC version by using biotin labeled ends, followed by deep sequencing. In any case, since the entire genome sequence is known, and since the experiment is done on many cells in parallel, the result allows one to reconstruct the contact map or, in polymer physics language, the probability W of contact between any two monomers of the same chain s and s , say W (s , s ). It is usually assumed that on average W depends only on the distance s = s − s , and so one can find the so-called loop factor, equivalently known as contact probability, P (s) which is the probability that two monomers a contour distance s apart meet in space. There is also one work [55] which carried out small angle neutron scattering experiments on the entire cell nucleus (of a chicken erythrocyte). The global spatial arrangement of the chromatin strands were analyzed. We comment on this experiment later in section 6.6.1. Since the essential quantitative information at our disposal comes from measuring subchain sizes r(s) and contact probabilities P (s), we start with a discussion of a simple approximate relation between these two quantities.

(9)

This assumes that the second end is more or less uniformly distributed over the volume r 3 (s), i.e. we make a mean field argument. Given that r(s) ∼ s ν , this argument yields for the critical exponent γ : γ = 3ν. (10) For the Gaussian coil (with ν = 1/2) this gives the well-known correct answer γ = 3/2 in 3D (or d/2 in dimension d). For the crumpled fractal globule ν = 1/3 (8) and, therefore, γ = 1. This simple theoretical estimate is in excellent agreement with HiC data for both human [13] and mouse chromosomes [16]. However nice the agreement between theory and experiment is, the exact 1/s scaling for the loop factor cannot be correct, at least not over an infinite range of length scales s. Take the total number of neighbors of any given monomer, namely the sum s P (s), which diverges for P (s) ∼ 1/s, i.e., a monomer would have a diverging number of close neighbors. For a chain of length N , this would mean that the number of spatial neighbors for a given monomer becomes of order ln N . This is surely impossible in the limit N → ∞. Nevertheless, from a theoretical point of view it is important to understand whether we are talking about a real fractal, which remains self-similar over an infinite range of scales and which approximates real chromatin over some finite range, or whether there is even theoretically no real fractal. Aesthetically the first alternative is more attractive, of course. But even logically, we can imagine arbitrarily long rings in the melt, much longer than any DNA in any real genome, and we want to understand the loop factor for such system and find out whether this system is fractal or not. Thus, to summarize, the mean field estimate P (s) ∼ 1/s (or γ = 1), which is based on the assumption of statistical independence between the subchain ends within the volume r 3 (s), cannot be accurate. There should be some correlation between subchain ends for any s. 6.3. Contact probability (loop factor) of chromatin: experiments

The contact probability of chromatin P (s) is the probability that two DNA loci on the same chromosome, separated by the genetic (contour) distance s (measured, for instance, in the number of base pairs), will be neighbors in real 3D space. This probability and its dependence on s was measured for human fibroblasts [13], mice [16], fruit flies [17], and yeast [83]. All these data are collected in figure 4. We see that the contact probability behaves rather similarly for human,

[Page 16]

nuclear envelope. Importantly, they simulated the equilibrium properties of the system, and obtained a very good account of the contact probability as well as a number of other structural data. The agreement thus obtained gives a convincing proof that folding of chromatin fiber in yeast can be reasonably considered as an equilibrium state of a confined polymer. In particular, this explains why the contact probability in yeast, as seen in figure 4, behaves very much like that of an equilibrium globule. Figure 4 demonstrates beyond a doubt that the chromatin of other species is organized differently compared to yeast. Our main hypothesis, already stated several times in different ways, suggests that the main difference is due to topological constraints. The relatively short genome of yeast does not need to reptate and, therefore, is equilibrated, as confirmed by the above discussed conclusions of the work [22]. We argue that genomes of higher eukaryotes do not have enough time to reptate. This of course goes along with our assertion that chromosome territories have topological origin. We now continue and hypothesize that the contact probabilities of the higher eukaryotes seen in figure 4 do not follow the equilibrium globule behavior also for the same topological reason. This topology-controlled deviation from standard equilibrium globule behavior is a manifestation of nonequilibrium of very long linear chains, or in a ring model it may be viewed as an equilibrium manifestation of topology.

Figure 4. HiC data of contact probability P (s) for various

organisms plotted in log–log scale against the genomic distance s. Every data set is normalized by the last data point. That means each curve represents P (s)/P (smax ), where of course the maximal s-value, smax , is different for different curves. In other words, every curve is vertically shifted such that its right-most point is on the level 1. Solid red: Drosophila Chromosome 3R [17]; solid blue: mouse [16]; solid green: human [13]; solid black: yeast [83], analysis of the data in [22]. Data for yeast, mouse, and human are averages over all chromosomes. Dashed red: slope −1 (corresponds to the mean field prediction P (s) ∼ s −1 ); dashed black: slope −3/2 (corresponds to equilibrium globule).

mouse, and drosophila cells. In particular, [13] reports that the loop factor scales as P (s) ∼ s −γ in the interval of roughly 0.5 Mbp s 7 Mbp, with a ‘critical exponent’ γ = 1.08 for the human genome. In a similar interval, the data for mouse [16] indicate γ = 1.05. However, the implicit error bar of these measurements is hard to estimate. This scaling appears to be consistent with the crumpled globule model, based on the previous mean field estimate of equation (10), as also emphasized in [46]. Based on this the authors of the experimental work [13] claimed agreement with the theoretical predictions based on crumpled globules. We leave aside the questions of error bars associated with the above mentioned values of γ as well as the question of the range of s where the power law fitting is considered. We refer the interested reader to the original papers as well as review articles [29–31]. Instead, we concentrate on the following observations. First, yeast definitely belongs to a separate class compared to all other organisms presented in figure 4. Second, the contact probability for yeast is roughly consistent with equilibrium globule behavior, both because the slope is close to −3/2 and because of the leveling-off at larger s, at least for the largest chromosome. Third, the contact probability for human, mice, and drosophila is definitely inconsistent with the equilibrium globule, both in terms of the slope being nowhere near −3/2 and the definite lack of leveling off. The situation with yeast was significantly clarified in the recent work [22], where the authors computationally examined an elaborate, but straightforward polymer model of the yeast nucleus. The estimated values for the Kuhn segment and linear density of yeast chromatin fiber were lK = 60 nm and 1/b = 83 bp nm−1 . They took into account the real lengths of all chromosome arms, the fact that each chromosome has a centromere attachment, and the fact that chromosome ends (telomere regions) are preferably located next to the

6.4. Subchain sizes in chromatin

The FISH method, which measures the subchain sizes r(s), was developed significantly earlier than the ‘C’ methods. From the polymer physics prospective, the value of r(s) is also well known for regular equilibrium globules: it behaves as r(s) ∼ s 1/2 up to s ∼ N 2/3 , i.e., up to the distance where the chain can cross the available volume by a random walk. Then r(s) levels off at r(s) ∼ N 1/3 and remains independent of s at all larger s. The first FISH data were consistent with the Gaussian scaling r(s) ∼ s 1/2 . For values of s up to about 5 × 105 base pairs the FISH data for r 2 (s) were satisfactorily approximated as a straight line in coordinates (r 2 , s). This tempted the authors of [6] to formulate the ‘random walk’ model of chromatin organization. In fitting the data there was a significant element of uncertainty for any analysis beyond the bare power law. Namely, if we believe that chromatin is a Gaussian polymer on a certain length scale, with a Kuhn segment of length l, if the number of base pairs per unit contour length is ρ then r(s) ≃ (ls/ρ)1/2 because s/ρ is the contour length. Although the Kuhn segment of bare DNA is known to be about 100 nm, it is not easy to determine a priori the relevant Kuhn segment for chromatin fiber, so the practical approach is to view it as an adjustable parameter. FISH data, apart from the very scaling r(s) ∼ s 1/2 , allow only to determine the combination of parameters l/ρ, not each of them separately. Nevertheless, more detailed FISH data for larger s showed some sign of slowing down in the growth of r(s) which was interpreted as the signature of spatial confinement. Accordingly, the work [35] introduced the model

[Page 17]

of a random walk in a confined volume. From a polymer physics point of view, this means that [6, 35] interpreted the FISH data as pointing to an equilibrium globule organization of chromatin. The difficulties of making this model consistent with excluded volume constraints, topological constraints, and the lack of reptation relaxation were not addressed in the early papers [6, 35]. Also, a fully developed saturation of r(s) was not observed. Therefore, an alternative interpretation of the slowing down of the growth of r(s) might be appropriate. A more recent FISH study [23] makes the point that r(s), at least for some chromosomes, saturates at a value of s significantly smaller than the nucleus size, as is clearly visible in figure 5. This suggests some mechanism of saturation other than volume confinement. The authors of [23] argue that this is evidence of what they call loop formation. They refer then to the well-known fact of entropic (topological in nature) repulsion between closed polymeric loops in dilute solution, as first reported in the work [129]. We note in passing that the territorial segregation of rings in a concentrated system, which is the central subject of our work, can be viewed as the result of the same repulsion in a very dense system. Importantly, this repulsion exists only for loops which maintain their closeness and remain nonconcatenated over the entire longevity of the experiment, i.e., in physics language, the loops have to be quenched. Annealed loops, which close and open in the course of thermal motion, exhibit no repulsion at all. Meanwhile, the fact that two monomers i and j gave a signal in a particular Hi-C experiment suggests that the piece of the chain between them formed a ‘loop’ at the time of the experiment, but it does not mean this loop was quenched before the experiment, in vivo. In our opinion, the interpretation of each Hi-C signal as an indication of a real quenched loop in the system is a mistake. Another interpretation would relate this effect to the territorial segregation. Namely, we can expect that a smaller chromosome gets topologically confined among bigger ones, just as one ring in the melt gets compressed by its neighbors. Such an explanation would of course make sense if and only if the size of even a small chromosome significantly exceeds the entanglement length Ne . That is one of the reasons why we discussed the estimate of Ne in detail before. According to the summary given in table 2, even the sizes of small chromosomes, whose r(s) saturates at distances s of about 0.5 Mbp = 500 kbp (see figure 5), are long enough for the topological mechanism to be functional. The overall dependence of r(s) being at least roughly consistent with the expected crumpled globule scaling r(s) ∼ s 1/3 (8) is visible in figure 5 in the s > Ne region. In recent years, much more detailed models have been developed to fit the FISH data. In most cases, the authors talk about delicately organized and balanced loops supported and controlled by special long lived cross-links (see, for instance, [21, 23, 38, 40]). The idea is that these cross-links are created by special biological mechanisms. There is no way for us to negate such a hypothesis. At the same time, one should first exhaust all possibilities to explain observations based on simple robust physics before resorting to biological machinery and the special actions of such machinery. Indeed, it seems

Figure 5. Collation of FISH (subchain size r(s)) and HiC (contact

probability P (s)) data, plotted log–log against the subchain length s. In light of the mean field relation P (s) ∼ r −3 (s) (9), FISH data are presented as r −3 (s). All data are for human cells. The thick orange line represents HiC data from [13]. All other data are FISH: blue filled squares [6]; red filled circles [7]; black filled triangles [23] for chromosome 11; green empty triangles [23] for chromosome 1; green empty circles [23] for ridges of chromosome 1. Where error bars are not shown, the authors of the experiments claim the error bars are smaller than the symbols used here. Note that of the different estimates of the blob size, the value derived from scattering experiments [55] is about the largest. These authors quote about 300 nm, which corresponds to an inverse volume of about 74 μm−3 , indicating a maximal distance well below all distances discussed here.

that nature is ‘opportunistic’ in the sense that it employs simple physics whenever possible. Although this question can perhaps be argued in different ways, here we concentrate on the possibility to explain observations regarding the chromatin organization based on topological constraints and polymer physics. 6.5. Theoretical issues: contacts between subchains

Let us return for a moment to the mean field relation γ = 3ν (10), and to the discussion of the fact that this relation cannot be exact for a true fractal over the unrestricted range of scales. The latter conclusion means that the critical exponent γ is not determined by the value of ν, i.e., it is a different, independent exponent. The existence of critical indexes independent of ν is not so surprising given our experience in polymer physics [49, 51, 52, 160]. Thus, for the rings in the melt we have to turn our attention to exponents independent of ν. That means we should take a more detailed view of conformations. One useful perspective opens up if we look at surfaces between neighboring rings in the melt of rings, or surfaces between subchains, i.e., to consider the index β which describes the roughness of the boundaries of territorial polymers. Furthermore, there are two closely related surface exponents β1 and β2 . They are defined in the following way: • Consider an s-long part of the chain. How many contacts does this part have with all other monomers? This scales with index β1 : #all contacts except with itself ∼ s β1 .

(11)

[Page 18]

This index characterizes the ‘surface area’ of the blob. • Consider two blobs of length s each, located next to one another in space. How many contacts do they have? This scales with index β2 : #contacts with another blob ∼ s β2 .

Self-similarity argument. Here we paraphrase the original argument given in [2]. Let us count how many pairs of monomers, a distance s apart along the chain, are in contact. There are ∼N pairs a distance s apart each, and with the probability of contact for each pair being s −γ , the number of pairs is N s −γ . Let us now re-count this same number in a different manner by using blobs of some g monomers each. We have Ng pairs of blobs, and the probability of contact between blobs is 6.5.2.

(12)

This index describes the ‘contact area’ between two touching blobs.

The relation between indexes β1 and β2 has to do with the number of blobs Q which can simultaneously be neighbors to one another: (13) s β1 = Qs β2 .

(18)

s β2 = γ,

(21)

It is instructive to see how all the relations above work in various known cases. First, consider a melt of linear chains. In this case, ν = 1/2, γ = d/2, β2 = 4−d (controls contacts between two overlapping blobs), and β1 = 1 (controls contacts of a given chain with monomers of any other), so all relations above work perfectly. It is worth emphasizing that the relations (17) and (18) represent general properties of self-similarly organized polymers. They do not rely on any specific properties of crumpled globules. In particular, they are not based on the mean field estimate of γ = νd. Since we know already that the mean field estimate is not accurate, we need to make our considerations not assuming anything specific about the value of γ . For the ‘naive’ crumped globule, best exemplified by a Hilbert curve or its circular analog called Moore curve [141] in 3D (figure 1), we have ν = 1/d = 1/3 and also all surfaces are pretty smooth, so β1 = β2 = 2/3 and then γ = 4/3. 6.5.4. Examples and comparisons.

Consider a polymer chain which is a space-filling fractal (i.e., ν = 1/d), and suppose its contact probability is P (s), with large s asymptotics being s −γ , γ > 1. For one monomer, the number of ‘foreign’ contacts (i.e., with monomers a distance s or greater away

along the chain) is proportional to ∞

s =s (s ), and for the whole subchain this number is s times larger. Thus # all contacts except with itself ∼ s β1 ∼ s 2−γ ,

(20)

which is again the result (18).

6.5.1. Counting argument [161].

−γ

= γ

Blob contact argument [161]. The probability of contact between two monomers a distance s apart, for instance, t − s/2 and t + s/2, is s −γ . Consider now two subchains of length s each, namely, one from t − s to t and another from t to t + s. They are centered at the two monomers of interest. These two subchains have s β2 contacts. What is the probability that one of these contacts is between the monomers of interest, t − s/2 and t + s/2? There are ∼s 2 possible choices of pairs of contacting monomers, therefore, the probability that one of these pairs will be chosen among the s β2 actual pairs is proportional to s β2 /s 2 . Thus this argument yields

Because of equation (15) these two relations are equivalent, and each of them gets reduced to the familiar result (16) in the case ν = 1/d. Below we briefly outline arguments leading to the relations (17) and (18). The arguments in sections 6.5.1 and 6.5.3 were developed during a discussion with Everaers and Rubinstein [161].

× g β2 ×

6.5.3.

(15)

Given that there are two indices β1 and β2 , there are two relations: (17) γ + β1 = νd + 1

∞

one arrives at formula (18).

For the dense fractal system with ν = 1/d we get β1 = β2 , which is why we used simply β in the work [2], deriving the relation γ + β = 2. (16)

∼s×

g γ blob contacts. Each blob contact

×

which yields

γ + β2 = 2.

, yielding Ng ×

delivers g β2 monomer contacts. However, these monomer contacts are between monomers a chemical distance s ± g apart, and only the 1/g fraction of those are a distance s apart. Thus, the number of monomer contacts is now expressed as × gs × g β2 × g1 . This must coincide with the original estimate N s −γ because the number of monomer contacts cannot depend on how we count them. By equating the two

To estimate Q we can resort to the physics of polymer solutions (see, e.g., the book [49]). Each subchain of length s is spread over volume ∼s νd (in d dimensions). This volume can contain s νd monomers, but since each subchain has s monomers we arrive at s νd (14) Q∼ = s νd−1 β1 = β2 + νd − 1.

−γ

(19)

s =s

which is the result (17).

[Page 19]

By contrast, if we accept the mean field estimate γ = νd, equation (10), and then take ν = 1/d for a dense fractal globule, we get β1 = β2 = 1 and also γ = 1. That means in this approximation, the surfaces of a fractal globule include some finite fraction of all monomers. In fact, these surfaces are so ‘rough’ that they can hardly be called surfaces. Quite apart from the terminological question of whether we can call different rings with β = 1 to be territorially segregated, we point out that such structures cannot be fractal with an unlimited spectrum of scales, which is the same conclusion we made based on the logarithmic divergence of the number of contacts. In general, there are several obvious conditions on the indexes: in d dimensions 1/d ⩽ ν ⩽ 1 and 1 − 1/d ⩽ β1 ⩽ 1, while β2 ⩽ β1 , and 0 ⩽ β2 ⩽ 1. It follows then from the relations above that in general 1 ⩽ γ ⩽ 2, while specifically for the compact case ν = 1/d a stricter bound holds: 1 ⩽ γ ⩽ 1 + 1/d. The numerical results for the melt of rings [5] indicate quite complex finite size behavior of different quantities. The total number of surface monomers for either the full ring or its subchains demonstrates a very accurate power law behavior throughout the studied range of polymer length, and shows β1 = 0.97. This value is just below unity, so one is tempted to suspect that it is unity. However, the fraction of surface monomers does decrease with chain length, so it is indeed possible that β1 < 1. Even more convincing data suggesting β1 < 1 are obtained from the scaling of the static structure factor, as we discuss below. At the same time, the contacts between blobs exhibit a very different finite size behavior, for the seeming power β2 , i.e., the slope of a log–log plot of monomer–monomer contacts between blobs against blob length s increases monotonically from well below 0.5 to somewhere close to unity at the largest s accessed in simulation so far. At the same time, the contact probability P (s) exhibits complementary behavior with the seeming value of γ (in the same sense) increasing with s, while the number of blob neighbors Q(s) seems to saturate at large s in accordance with (14). The nature of this finite size behavior remains to be understood.

between the chromatin fiber and its immediate surrounding, i.e., typically salty water and proteins. However, even within the scale of the blobs, this scattering contrast usually is very weak. For x-rays to be used efficiently the electron density is too small and for neutrons the overall density of H atoms does not display enough variation. To improve this, one can create an artificial contrast. For instance, in the case of neutron scattering of polymer systems, the usual procedure is deuteration, i.e., replacement of hydrogen atoms for deuterium in one of the components of the system. Here this would correspond to a (partial) deuteration of the water. Neutron scattering is a perfect tool to study subtle variations in H and D densities, since H and D have dramatically different scattering lengths [162, 163]. We are aware of only one piece of experimental work [55] examining chromatin structure (of a chicken erythrocyte) by small angle neutron scattering (see also the work [164] by the same group attempting to simulate the data). In this experiment, scattering indeed was based on the contrast between DNA and surrounding water, a mixture of H2 O and D2 O. On length scales within the blob size one expects a variation of the scattering intensity as a function of momentum transfer, providing information about the structure of the chromatin fiber. For larger scales both the density of the solvent and chromatin are averaged out, suppressing any change in the scattering signal. From this crossover one can directly read off the blob size, at least in principle. The scattering experiment [55] indicates a homogeneous smeared out DNA density on length scales above 300 to 450 nm or, equivalently, for momentum transfers between q ⩽ 2π/450 nm and q ⩽ 2π/300 nm. While this confirms the concept of a homogeneous, concentrated solution, the quoted blob size certainly is too large to accommodate the contour length of the chromatin fiber with lp ≈ 150 nm and about 40 bp nm−1 . Indeed, standard polymer physics arguments [49, 51, 52] imply that the blob size is about ξ = (ρK lK )−1/2 (because ξ < lK implies that the fiber is nearly straight inside the blob). For the parameters of the human cell nucleus discussed above, this would be about ξ ≈ 60 nm. For the higher density chicken erythrocyte ξ should be even smaller. This discrepancy between measured blob size and theoretical estimates can result from different sources. One possible reason is due to the overall small accuracy of the data because the system is much more complex than a regular semidilute polymer solution, where such methods have been employed very successfully. In addition, experiments have been performed on the nuclei of chicken erythrocytes, which are quite different from other eukaryotic cells. The experiments of [55] also provide the first information about the fractal property (on scales below the blob diameter) of the DNA fold itself, but cannot reveal any information of the global indices ν, β, or γ . It also does not give information about the relevant contour length and the Kuhn segment of the chromatin fiber inside the blob, which would provide an independent estimate of the entanglement length.

6.6. Static structure factor and scattering off chromatin 6.6.1. Spatial nuclear density (in-)homogeneity: scattering results. The whole line of quantitative arguments above relies

on the assumption that there are no strong density variations on scales of the order of the entanglement length and beyond. The classical color pictures of chromatin territories (see figure 3) suggest a homogeneous density throughout the cell nucleus. This however might be misleading as the wavelength of visible light is too large to easily allow one to resolve greater local density variation by eye. To be more accurate, one could resort to scattering experiments. For that we can start from the structure of the ‘semidilute chromatin solution’, which can in principle be determined by scattering experiments [49, 51]. In a melt or dense solution there are no density fluctuations expected to exist beyond the scale of the blob size. On scales smaller than the blob diameter, one can resolve the single chain structure. This, however, requires sufficient scattering contrast

Although a few scattering experiments have been performed so far, this is a very promising technique, which motivates us to discuss what

6.6.2. Scaling of the static structure factor.

[Page 20]

we can expect theoretically. In general, the static structure factor is the most informative characteristic of conformations. We denote it S(q), with q the scattering wave vector (q = 2π sin θ/2/λ, where θ is the scattering angle and λ is the wavelength of scattered waves). Usually, in the most interesting interval of q, namely 2π/Rg < q < 2π/b, the static structure factor scales as S(q) ∼ q −1/ν . Accordingly, one would expect to be able to distinguish a Gaussian coil (S(q) ∼ q −2 ) or a ball with smooth surface (Porod law, S(q) ∼ q −4 ) from a crumpled globule with expected scaling S(q) ∼ q −3 . This conclusion, however appealing, holds only on scales below the blob size, and its application is tricky because of the fractal surfaces between territories, which smear out the scattering contrast. Corresponding analysis was presented in [2] based on the ideas of the works [165–167] for 2D melts. The argument was originally given without making the distinction between β1 and β2 by assuming that they were the same. The essence of the argument can be formulated in the following way. Imagine that we labeled (for instance, deuterated) some n monomers. The static structure factor is defined by the formula:

Nevertheless, our present understanding, which is based on the several different measurements discussed above, remains that β is slightly smaller than unity while γ is slightly larger than one. 7. Dynamics

From a comprehensive polymer physics viewpoint, we should consider the dynamics of the ring melts and not only the statistics of equilibrium conformations. This is a difficult task, because reptation [49–53], the workhorse of polymer dynamics theory, does not apply for the rings as they have no ends. The simplest model, the dynamics of a single ring in a lattice of immobile obstacles, can be analyzed in great detail (see, e.g., the problems for chapter 9 in the book [51] as well as papers [137, 139]). However, since the lattice of obstacles concept is not proven even for statics, its usefulness for dynamics remains questionable. Recent works [140, 150, 151] may change this situation and give more credence to the generalized lattice animal model based on annealed branched polymer theory. It is perhaps too early to decide how successful this theory is. So far we have to rely on simulations. We can summarize the main findings [3] as follows: If r (t) is the time dependent position vector of one ring (say, its mass center, with the convention that r (t = 0) = 0), then at very long times r 2 (t) ≃ 6DN t, and we can address the N -dependence of the diffusion coefficient. It was found [3] that DN ∼ N −2.3 , which is not dramatically different from the result of similar simulations and experiments for linear chains, DN ∼ N −2.4 . At the same time the viscosity of the melt of rings increases with N dramatically slower than for linear chains, as η ∼ N 1.4 (instead of N 3.4 for linear chains). At smaller times, before the cross-over to regular diffusion, r 2 (t) was found to exhibit sub-diffusion, although somewhat faster sub-diffusion (roughly t 3/4 for the ring sizes considered in the simulations) than for linear chains (t 1/2 ). For linear chains the cross-over between the sub-diffusion and diffusion regimes for the displacement of the center of mass of the chains is observed at about the Rouse time O(N 2 ), well below the time of stress relaxation, O(N 3.4 ). Surprisingly, this is not the case for the ring systems, where molecules continue to sub-diffuse long after the stress has completely relaxed, as far as the accuracy of the present simulations can determine this. An explanation of this observation, beyond the fact that shape fluctuations do not necessarily contribute to the overall ring diffusion, remains to be found. In terms of mapping polymer models to chromatin, an interesting estimate can be performed based on the fact that the diffusion coefficients behave nearly identically while viscosities behave so dramatically different for the melt of territorial globules versus a melt of entangled linear chains. This difference indicates that the relaxation mechanism, which controls viscosity, in the territorial system is decoupled from translational motion, which is manifested in the diffusion coefficient. Therefore, the ratio of viscosities for territorial globules and for entangled linear chains, which scales as ∼N −2 according to our computational result, reflects the

exp ı q · ri − rj S(q) = n i =j

.

(22)

For the moment let us assume that the labeled part is either one entire ring (n = N ) or some part of it (n < N). In this case, the static structure factor (22) has the following properties. First, at q = 0 we always obtain S(q = 0) = n. Second, in the intermediate range of q we expect some power law dependence S(q) ∼ q x , where the power x is to be found. Moreover, since the overall size R ∼ bnν is the only relevant length scale (since we deal with one ring or its part), we can write S(q) ∼ n(qR)x ∼ q x n1+νx . Third, and this is the most delicate part of the argument, the only place where scattering can take place is the surface of the labeled part. Therefore, the total scattered intensity, which is equal to nS(q), must depend on the number of labeled monomers as nβ . Comparing, we conclude that 2 + νx = β. Therefore, the structure factor scales as nβ−1 S(q) ∼ (2−β)/ν . (23) For instance, for the linear chain in a regular polymer melt all monomers belong to ‘surface’, as they contact with other chains, so β = 1 and we return to the familiar result S(q) ∼ q −1/ν (where ν = 1/2 for the melt). But for the melt of rings β = 1 and the use of a more sophisticated scaling (23) is necessary. Computational data for both lattice and off-lattice systems were fit using formula (23), and the result β = 0.93 was found [5]. The fitting procedure used in our works [2, 5] was criticized and placed under doubt in a recent comment [168] (see also our reply in [169]). However, it is worth emphasizing that the scaling formula (23) was not questioned, only the numerical fitting procedure. In light of this criticism, extracting reliable estimates of β and γ from static structure factor measurements will have to wait for more accurate data.

[Page 21]

ratio of the relevant relaxation times. This ratio is about 2 × 102 for the longest chains for which both linear and ring polymers were tested in [3] (N = 800, N/Ne ≈ 29). Therefore, simple extrapolation suggests that even for short human chromosomes, for which N/Ne ≈ 1200, the relaxation time is shortened by about 5 orders of magnitude (a factor of about 3.2 × 105 ) because of territorial segregation. Obviously, this is a very significant advantage. Much more attention to dynamics was paid by Rosa and Everaers in their work [19]. Another interesting aspect in which the melt of rings model can be compared to chromatin data has to do with sub-diffusion at shorter time scales. We here only point out that most reported observations of sub-diffusion in the cell nucleus deal with rather small length scales, below about 200 nm [56, 57, 60, 61, 70], and it may be unrelated to the topic of our interest, which is the role of topological constraints. Or in polymer language, these phenomena are likely to happen below the concentration blob and tube diameter scales.

9. Concluding remarks

The genome of a eukaryotic cell is stored in the cell nucleus as a very long chromatin fiber. It is confined rather densely in the limited space of the nucleus, but at the same time all (or at least many) parts of it are accessible for cell machinery manipulations. This means, chromatin fiber is incomparably less tangled than a random thread of comparable length packed into a comparably small volume. The underlying principles governing this efficient genome organization are poorly understood. We argue that at least a significant fraction of this puzzle belongs to the realm of polymer physics. This follows from a very generic argument: chromatin fiber has a one dimensional connectivity and it obeys the excluded volume constraint. Therefore, its conformation in space belongs to the class of socalled self-avoiding walks (SAW). However, there are a huge variety of SAWs, and this raises questions about the SAWs that chromatin follows and why they are found in the cell. Two types of SAWs are most frequently considered in polymer physics, neither of which is a good candidate to model chromatin: isolated SAWs (dilute set of coils in a good solvent) or a dense tangle of SAWS (as in a melt). In both cases the SAWs are self-similar fractals, but different ones, characterized by different swelling exponents ν for their gyration radii (Rg ∼ N ν with ν ≈ 3/5 for an isolated SAW and ν = 1/2 for the melt). The third commonly considered type, the so-called equilibrium globule, is typically a single chain SAW confined in a volume comparable to the joint excluded volume of its monomers. This is also not a good candidate to model chromatin because it is very heavily tangled. The selection of a specific type of SAW in real chromatin is controlled in two ways. First, chromatin fiber is not naked DNA but a complex of DNA with a large variety of proteins [31]. The pieces of such a complex ‘polymer’ do obey the excluded volume, but they also interact in a complex way via their associated proteins. Second, the chromatin fiber is thermodynamically not an equilibrium system and its folding is under some sort of a dynamic control. Following the work [43], we hypothesize that these mechanisms select SAW conformations which are weakly tangled, because it is necessary for biological functions, but otherwise random. In other words, the hypothesis is that conformations, although not equilibrated, correspond to conditional maximum of entropy, conditioned on weak tangling. This leads then to the workhorse model of nonconcatenated rings, first suggested in [19]. It cannot be overemphasized that we do not assume chromatin fibers to be rings. The model of rings is motivated only by the above hypothesis of partial, incomplete entropy maximization, restricted by weak tangling. Of course, this is consistent with the fact that the estimated relaxation time (‘reptation time’) for the chromatin fiber is much longer than the life time of any cell. Because of this logic, we reviewed in this article two interconnected but distinct lines of research. On the one hand, there is the pure polymer physics problem: a melt of nonconcatenated unknotted rings. It turned out to be a challenging problem in its own right. On the other hand,

8. Role of sequence

The fractal crumpled globule hypothesis is attractive because it is based on very generic properties of polymers and does not involve any assumptions of an evolutionary developed special machinery. But we know of course that DNA does have a sequence of base pairs, which cannot be ignored. It is a particularly relevant and intriguing question in regards to the non-coding DNA, the introns. Their role in general is unclear, and one cannot exclude the possibility that they are somehow involved in the control of genome folding. If there is any relation between large scale features of sequence and structure, its casual nature can be speculated to be in any of two directions. On the one hand, since chromatin conformations are to some extent fractal for the reasons of topology discussed above, it is possible to imagine DNA sequences which in the course of evolution develop some degree of self-similarity. On the other hand, it is also possible that a particular conformation or group of conformations of chromatin can be additionally stabilized by selecting the proper DNA sequence, provided that protein-mediated interactions are sufficiently complex and diverse. It is instructive to compare this situation with the relation between sequences and structures known for proteins [170]. The use and applicability of these types of ideas for chromatin is in no way self-evident. We can speculate that the role of volume interactions in the chromatin case will be relegated to the complex relations between chromatin pieces realized via histone and non-histone proteins and nucleosomes. We point out in this regard that the relation between fractal properties of sequences and fractal arrangement of conformations is known even for models with very simple interactions [171–173]; it seems, therefore, very reasonable to expect that much more sophisticated interactions, involving architectural proteins and the like, are also likely to lead to some sort of connections between sequences and structures.

[Page 22]

we attempted to gain insight into chromatin based on the newly acquired knowledge about rings. Our theoretical thinking in this direction was informed by the new generation of experiments, including those on chromosome territories, FISH, and ‘C’ (from 3C to Hi–C) [6–18] as well as computational work [19–23]. The results presented indicate that rings in the melt are segregated for topological reasons, i.e., they correspond to SAWs with ν = 1/3. This gives a very natural explanation of the phenomenon of chromosome territories. Furthermore, conformations of rings in the melt appear to be self-similar fractals consistent with the crumpled globule idea [105]. The fractal properties of chromatin were noted and discussed in a number of contexts [56, 75]. The melt of rings model sheds some light on these observations. More detailed experiments, such as Hi-C, address properties which from a theoretical viewpoint go beyond the index ν and have to do with an independent set of indices, denoted above as β and γ . Our theoretical understanding of the corresponding properties is incomplete even on the level of rings. Simulations indicate that γ appears to be slightly above unity, meaning that the contact probability between DNA loci decays as s −γ , somewhat faster than s −1 which seems to be consistent with observations for higher eukaryotes such as humans and mice [13, 16, 17]. At the same time, Hi–C data for yeast are closer to γ = 3/2 which is characteristic of an equilibrated polymer globule and consistent with the fact that yeast chromatin is significantly shorter, owing to the lack of non-coding DNA. These successes seem sufficiently encouraging to continue the study of the topological properties of weakly tangled dense polymer systems with the idea in mind to learn more about chromatin. This is why we would like to conclude by listing a set of open questions pertaining to both the melt of rings model system and its more general application to chromatin. We start with relatively simple, well-defined problems and then continue to increasingly tough questions. It is established that one can construct space-filling curves with any desirable value of γ > 1. However, what are the entropically dominant values of the critical exponents β and γ for a polymer system without knots? In other words, what are β and γ for the majority of all non-tangled space-filling curves? (We emphasize here that the powers β and γ are not very accurately measured in experiments and characterize a relatively narrow window of scales; however, we view them as an important tool to understand the system, which is why we view them as relevant.) How can one understand the sub-diffusion of rings in dense, nonconcatenated systems and how can one understand the fact that sub-diffusion continues for a time longer than the apparent stress relaxation time? How could this relate to the properties of chromatin fibers in territories? How does it relate to the observations of subdiffusion (of telomeres and of inserted particles) in chromatin? What is the role of DNA sequence in the formation and support of chromatin folding (via its effect on histones and other proteins in and around chromatin fiber and thus on the fiber–fiber interactions)? In particular, what is the connection between the fractal organization of chromatin in space and long-range correlations in non-coding DNA sequences [172]?

(Although arguments in this direction in the work [43] were based on the naive assumption β = 2/3, the question remains valid and open.) How do crumpled globules or other polymer models react to chemical ‘signal’ modifications, such as methylation, which formally means perturbing the parameters of volume interactions? How do particles diffuse through the chromatin matrix? Another group of questions pertains to the bridge between polymer physics and chromatin folding. As we discussed, the physical parameters of chromatin fiber are poorly known at present, including the simple ones such as persistence length or even linear density (the number of base pairs per unit contour length). We also pointed out that the entanglement length depends on these parameters, but also very sensitively on the density, which in this case is controlled by the cell nucleus size. The volume of the nucleus can easily be different by a factor of two for different cells. For non-entangled territorial chromatin fibers this factor only weakly affects the friction, and thus the prefactor to the relevant relaxation times. For an entangled system the resulting change of Le would alter the relaxation times dramatically, asking for different relaxation mechanisms for different cells. We view this as a powerful argument supporting our main topological hypothesis. This list of open questions is easy to continue. The important conclusion that we want to emphasize is that modern quantitative experimental methods allow one to place the serious physical analysis of chromatin folding on rather solid footing. The first impressive steps have been taken in the context of FISH and HiC experiments, to name the two most prominent approaches. As physicists, we expect scattering experiments to pick-up and to provide valuable information as well. We also see grounds to expect a large role for simulations. They appear to be extremely promising for a thorough analysis of the static and dynamic properties of well-defined model systems. They allow a direct comparison to either experiment or theory or both. In the case of melts of nonconcatenated rings, the simulations so far provide the only way to generate data of perfectly controlled, equilibrated systems. They impressively demonstrate the crucial role of topological constraints. Already a simple visual inspection illustrates the similarity of ring polymer territories and chromosome territories. The quite close agreement of numerical estimates of the exponent γ from simulation data of long, concentrated ring polymers and those from ‘C’ and ‘FISH’ experiments, further supports our view that polymer physics concepts can provide very helpful arguments on our way to better understand the complex morphology of the chromatin fiber in the interphase cell nucleus. Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge useful discussions with Robijn Bruinsma, Job Dekker, Ralf Everaers, Yuval Garini, Gary Grest, Maxim Imakaev, Erez Lieberman-Aiden, Ron Milo, Leonid Mirny, Sergei Nechaev, Rob Phillips, Yitzhak Rabin, Michael Rubinstein, Jean-Louis Sikorav, Jean-Marc Victor, Edouard Yeramian, Alexandra Zidovska, Christophe Zimmer.

[Page 23]

This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. NSF PHY11-25915. KK, JS, and AYG acknowledge the hospitality of KITP Santa Barbara where part of this work was completed. KK acknowledges the hospitality of the Center for Soft Matter Research at NYU and AYG acknowledges the support from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation through a Senior Scientist Award to spend time at the MPI for Polymer Research. Research carried out in part at the Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under contract no. DE-AC02-98CH10886.

[28] Cremer T, Cremer M, Dietzel S, Müller S, Solovei I and Fakan S 2006 Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 18 307 [29] Mirny L A 2011 Chromosome Res. 19 37 [30] Fudenberg G and Mirny L A 2012 Curr. Opin. Genetics Dev. 22 115 [31] Dekker J and van Steensel B 2013 Handbook of Systems Biology: Concepts and Insights ed Walhout M et al (Amsterdam: Elsevier) pp 137–51, chapter 7 [32] van Steensel B 2011 The EMBO J. 30 1885 [33] de Graaf C A and van Steensel B 2013 Curr. Opin. Genetics Dev. 23 185 [34] Rosa A and Zimmer C 2014 Int. Rev. Cell. Molec. Biol. 307 275 [35] Hahnfeldt P, Hearst J E, Brenner D J, Sachs R K and Hlatky L R 1993 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 90 7854 [36] Sachs R K, van den Engh G, Trask B, Yokota H and Hearst J E 1995 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92 2710 [37] Marko J F and Siggia E D 1997 Mol. Biol. Cell 8 2217 [38] Ostashevsky J 1998 Mol. Biol. Cell 9 3031 [39] Schiessel H, Gelbart W M and Bruinsma R 2001 Biophys. J. 80 1940 [40] Ostashevsky J 2002 Mol. Biol. Cell 13 2157 [41] Cook P R and Marenduzzo D 2009 J. Cell Biol. 186 825 [42] Tark-Dame M, van Driel R and Heermann D W 2011 J. Cell Sci. 124 839 [43] Grosberg A Y, Rabin Y, Havlin S and Neer A 1993 Europhys. Lett. 23 373 [44] Sikorav J-L and Jannink G 1994 Biophys. J. 66 827 [45] Vettorel T, Grosberg A Y and Kremer K 2009 Phys. Today 62 72 [46] Rosa A, Becker N B and Everaers R 2010 Biophys. J. 98 2410 [47] Blackstone T, Scharein R, Borgo B, Varela R, Diao Y and Arsuaga J 2011 J. Math. Biol. 62 371 [48] Dorier J and Stasiak A 2009 Nucl. Acids Res. 37 6316 [49] de Gennes P-G 1979 Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University) [50] Doi M and Edwards S F 1986 The Theory of Polymer Dynamics (Oxford: Oxford Universiy Press) [51] Rubinstein M and Colby R 2005 Polymer Physics (Oxford: Oxford University Press) [52] Grosberg A Y and Khokhlov A R 1994 Statistical Physics of Macromolecules (New York: AIP) [53] Grosberg A Y and Khokhlov A R 2011 Giant Molecules (Singapore: World Scientific) [54] Takahashi M 1989 J. Theor. Biol. 141 117—36 [55] Lebedev D, Filatov M, Kuklin A, Islamov A, Kentzinger E, Pantina R, Toperverg B and Isaev-Ivanov V 2005 FEBS Lett. 579 1465 [56] Bancaud A, Lavelle C, Huet S and Ellenberg J 2012 Nucleic Acids Res. 40 8783 [57] Bancaud A, Huet S, Daigle N, Mozziconacci J, Beaudouin J and Ellenberg J 2009 EMBO J. 28 3785 [58] Marshall W F, Straight A, Marko J, Swedlow J, Dernburg A, Belmont A, Murray A W, Agard D A and Sedat J W 1997 Curr. Biol. 7 930 [59] Bornfleth H, Edelmann P, Zink D, Cremer T and Cremer C 1999 Biophys J. 77 2871 [60] Golding I and Cox E 2006 Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 098102 [61] Banks D and Fradin C 2005 Biophys. J. 89 2960 [62] Heun P, Laroche T, Shimada K, Furrer P and Gasser S M 2001 Science 294 2181 [63] Tseng Y, Lee J S H, Kole T P, Jiang I and Wirtz D 2004 J. Cell Sci. 117 2159 [64] Dahl K N, Engler A J, Pajerowski J D and Discher D E 2005 Biophys. J. 89 2855 [65] Levi V, Ruan Q, Plutz M, Belmont A S and Gratton E 2005 Biophys. J. 89 4275 [66] Meshorer E, Yellajoshula D, George E, Scambler P J, Brown D T and Misteli T 2006 Developmental Cell 10 105

References [1] Vettorel T, Grosberg A Y and Kremer K 2009 Phys. Biol. 6 025013 [2] Halverson J D, Lee W B, Grest G S, Grosberg A Y and Kremer K 2011 J. Chem. Phys. 134 204904 [3] Halverson J D, Lee W B, Grest G S, Grosberg A Y, and Kremer K 2011 J. Chem. Phys. 134 204905 [4] Halverson J D, Grest G S, Grosberg A Y and Kremer K 2012 Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 038301 [5] Halverson J D, Kremer K and Grosberg A Y 2013 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 46 065002 [6] van den Engh G, Sachs R and Trask B 1992 Science 257 1410 [7] Yokota H, van den Engh G, Hearst J, Sachs R and Trask B 1995 J. Cell Biol. 130 1239 [8] Cremer T and Cremer C 2001 Nature Rev. Genetics 2 292 [9] Dekker J, Rippe K, Dekker M and Kleckner N 2002 Science 295 1306 [10] Gilbert N, Boyle S, Fiegler H, Woodfine K, Carter N and Bickmore W 2004 Cell 118 555 [11] Simonis M, Klous P, Splinter E, Moshkin Y, Willemsen R, de Wit E, van Steensel B and de Laat W 2006 Nature Genetics 38 1348 [12] Jhunjhunwala S, van Zelm M C, Peak M M, Cutchin S, Riblet R, van Dongen J J, Grosveld F G, Knoch T A and Murre C 2008 Cell 133 265 [13] Lieberman-Aiden E et al 2009 Science 326 289 [14] Kawamura R, Pope L H, Christensen M O, Sun M, Terekhova K, Boege F, Mielke C, Andersen A H and Marko J F 2010 J. Cell Biol. 188 653 [15] Weiland Y, Lemmer P and Cremer C 2011 Chromosome Res. 19 5 [16] Zhang Y, McCord R, Ho Y-J, Lajoie B, Hildebrand D, Simon A, Becker M, Alt F and Dekker J 2012 Cell 148 908 [17] Sexton T, Yaffe E, Kenigsberg E, Bantignies F Leblanc B, Hoichman M, Parrinello H, Tanay A and Cavalli G 2012 Cell 148 458 [18] Markaki Y, Smeets D, Fiedler S, Schmid V J, Schermelleh L, Cremer T and Cremer M 2012 Bioassays 34 412 [19] Rosa A and Everaers R 2008 PLoS Comput. Biol. 4 e1000153 [20] Junier I, Martin O and Képès F 2010 PLoS Comput. Biol. 6 e1000678 [21] Iyer B V S and Arya G 2012 Phys. Rev. E 86 011911 [22] Wong H, Marie-Nelly H, Herbert S, Carrivain P, Blanc H, Koszul R, Fabre E and Zimmer C 2012 Curr. Biol. 22 1881 [23] Mateos-Langerak J et al 2009 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106 3812 [24] Bohn M and Heermann D W 2010 Macromolecules 43 2564 [25] Bohn M and Heermann D W 2010 J. Chem. Phys. 132 044904 [26] Bohn M and Heermann D W 2011 PLoS One 6 e14428 [27] Fritsche M, Reinholdt L G, Lessard M, Handel M A, Bewersdorf J and Heermann D W 2012 PLoS One 7 e36282

[Page 24]

[67] Chuang C-H, Carpenter A E, Fuchsova B, Johnson T, de Lanerolle P and Belmont A S 2006 Curr. Biol. 16 825 [68] de Vries A H B, Krenn B E, van Driel R, Subramaniam V, and Kanger J S 2007 Nano Lett. 7 1424 [69] Pajerowski J D, Dahl K N, Zhong F L, Sammak P J and Discher D E 2007 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 104 15619–24 [70] Bronstein I, Israel Y, Kepten E, Mai S, Shav-Tal Y, Barkai E and Garini Y 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 018102 [71] Celedon A, Hale C M and Wirtz D 2011 Biophys. J. 101 1880 [72] Hameed F M, Rao M and Shivashankar G V 2012 PLoS One 7 e45843 [73] Hinde E, Cardarelli F, Chen A, Khine M and Gratton E 2012 Epigenetics Chromatin 5 20 [74] Weber S, Spakowitz A and Theriot J 2012 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109 7338 [75] Burnecki K, Kepten E, Janczura J, Bronshtein I, Garini Y and Weron A 2012 Biophys. J. 103 1839–47 [76] Kepten E, Bronshtein I and Garini Y 2013 Phys. Rev. E 87 [77] Zhu J et al 2013 Cell 152 642 [78] Meaburn K J and Misteli T 2007 Nature 445 379 [79] Höfers C, Jovin T M, Hummer G and Arndt-Jovin D J 1993 Bioimaging 1 107 [80] Höfers C, Baumann P, Hummer G, Jovin T M and Arndt-Jovin D J 1993 Bioimaging 1 96 [81] Solovei I, Cavallo A, Schermelleh L, Jaunin F, Scasselati C, Cmarko D, Cremer C, Fakan S and Cremer T 2002 Exp. Cell Res. 276 10 [82] Bridger J and Volpi E (ed) 2010 Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH): Protocols and Applications vol 659 (Totowa, NJ: Humana) [83] Duan Z, Andronescu M, Schutz K, McIlwain S, Kim Y J, Lee C, Shendure J, Fields S, Blau C A and Noble W S 2010 Nature 465 363 [84] Kiermer V 2006 Nature Methods 3 872 [85] Knobler C M and Gelbart W M 2009 Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 60 367 [86] Micheletti C, Marenduzzo D and Orlandini E 2011 Phys. Rep. 504 1 [87] Thanbichler M, Wang S and Shapiro L 2005 J. Cell Biochem. 96 506–21 [88] Benza V G, Bassetti B, Dorfman K D, Scolari V F, Bromek K Cicuta P and Lagomarsino M C 2012 Rep. Prog. Phys. 75 076602 [89] Gruber S 2011 Mol. Microbiol. 81 855–9 [90] Dame R T, Tark-Dame M and Schiessel H 2011 Mol. Microbiol. 82 1311 [91] Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K and Walter P 2008 Molecular Biology of the Cell (New York: Garland Science) [92] Wolfe S L 1993 Molecular and Cellular Biology (Independence, KY: Wadsworth) [93] Wikipedia 2012 Chromatin Remodeling: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chromatin remodeling [94] Chakravarthy S, Park Y, Chodaparambil J, Edayathumangalam R and Luger K 2005 FEBS Lett. 579 895–8 [95] Meyer S, Becker N B, Syed S H, Goutte-Gattat D, Shukla M S, Hayes J J, Angelov D, Bednar J, Dimitrov S and Everaers R 2011 Nucl. Acids Res. 39 9139–54 [96] Segal E, Fondufe-Mittendorf Y, Chen L, Thastrom A C, Field Y, Moore I K, Wang J-P Z and Widom J 2006 Nature 442 772 [97] Emanuel M, Radja N H, Hendriksson A and Schiessel H 2009 Phys. Biol. 6 025008 [98] Hansen J C 2012 EMBO J. 31 1621 [99] Bloom K and Joglekar A 2010 Nature 463 446 [100] Phillips-Cremins J et al 2013 Cell 153 1281

[101] Bodnar M and Spector D 2013 Cell 153 1187 [102] Milo R 2012 BioNumbers: http://bionumbers.hms.harvard.edu/KeyNumbers.aspx [103] Phillips R and Milo R 2014 Cell Biology by Numbers in press [104] Grosberg A Y, Rabin Y, Havlin S and Neer A 1993 Biofizika (Moscow) 38 75 [105] Grosberg A Y, Nechaev S K and Shakhnovich E I 1988 J. Physique (France) 49 2095 [106] Dixon J R, Selvaraj S, Yue F, Kim A, Li Y, Shen Y, Hu M, Liu J S and Ren B 2012 Nature 485 376 [107] Vettorel T and Kremer K 2010 Macromol. Theory Simul. 19 44–56 [108] McLeish T C B 2007 Soft Matter 3 83–7 [109] Olovnikov A M 1973 J. Theor. Biol. 41 181 [110] Szostak J and Blackburn E 1982 Cell 29 245 [111] Greider C and Blackburn E 1985 Cell 43 405 [112] Greider C and Blackburn E 1989 Nature 337 331 [113] de Gennes P-G 1968 Biopolymers 6 715 [114] Sulkowska J I, Rawdon E J, Millett K C, Onuchic J N and Stasiak A 2012 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 109 E1715 [115] Colby R, Rubinstein M and Viovy J 1992 Macromolecules 25 996 [116] Fetters L, Lohse D and Graessley W 1999 J. Polym. Sci. B 37 1023 [117] Everaers R, Sukumaran S K, Grest G S, Svaneborg C, Sivasubramanian A and Kremer K 2004 Science 303 823 [118] Sukumaran S K, Grest G S, Kremer K and Everaers R 2005 J. Polym. Sci. B 43 917 [119] Uchida N, Grest G S and Everaers R 2008 J. Chem. Phys. 128 044902 [120] Barham P J and Sadler D M 1991 Polymer 32 393 [121] de Gennes P-G 1995 C. R. Acad. Sci., Paris 321(II b) 363 [122] Rastogi S, Lippits D R, Peters G W M, Graf R, Yao Y and Spiess H W 2005 Nature Mater. 4 635 [123] Kim J U, Yang Y-B and Lee W B 2012 Macromolecules 45 3263 [124] Cates M and Deutsch J 1986 J. Physique (France) 47 2121 [125] Moore N T and Grosberg A Y 2005 Phys. Rev. E 72 061803 [126] Sakaue T 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 167802 [127] Sakaue T 2012 Phys. Rev. E 85 021806 [128] Grosberg A Y 1993 Macromolecules 26 3200 [129] Vologodski A V, Lukashin A V and Frank-Kamenetski M D 1974 Sov. Phys.—JETP 67 1875 [130] Nechaev S and Vasilyev O 2005 J. Knot Theory Ramifications 14 243 [131] Nechaev S K, Grosberg A Y and Vershik A M 1996 J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 29 2411 [132] Lua R, Borovinskiy A L and Grosberg A Y 2004 Polymer 45 717 [133] Raoul G T B, Schram D and Schiessel H 2013 J. Chem. Phys. 138 224901 [134] Alipour E and Marko J F 2012 Nucl. Acids Res. 40 11202 [135] Edwards S F 1977 Br. Polym. J. 9 140 [136] Khokhlov A and Nechaev S 1985 Phys. Lett. A 112 156 [137] Rubinstein M 1986 Phys. Rev. Lett. 57 3023 [138] Nechaev S K, Semenov A N and Koleva M K 1987 Physica A 140 506 [139] Obukhov S P, Rubinstein M and Duke T 1994 Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 1263 [140] Grosberg A Y 2014 Soft Matter 10 560–5 [141] Sagan H 1994 Space-filling Curves (Heidelberg: Springer) [142] Platzman L and Bartholdi J III 1989 J. Assoc. Comput. Mach. 36 719 [143] Smrek J and Grosberg A Y 2013 Physica A 392 6375 [144] Lieberman-Aiden E 2012 Seminar Talk at Courant Institute (New York) [145] Müller M, Wittmer J P and Cates M E 1996 Phys. Rev. E 53 5063 [146] Brown S and Szamel G 1998 J. Chem. Phys. 109 6184

[Page 25]

[161] Everaers R, Grosberg A and Rubinstein M 2011 unpublished results of discussions at KITP, Santa Barbara [162] Borsali R and Pecora R (ed) 2008 Soft Matter Characterization vol I–II (Berlin: Springer) [163] Richter D 2000 Physica B 276 22 [164] Ilatovskiy A V, Lebedev D V, Filatov M V, Grigoriev M, Petukhov M G and Isaev-Ivanov V V 2011 J. Appl. Phys. 110 102217 [165] Duplantier B 1989 J. Stat. Phys. 54 581 [166] Meyer H, Wittmer J P, Kreer T, Johner A and Baschnagel J 2010 J. Chem. Phys. 132 184904 [167] Carmesin I and Kremer K 1990 J. Physique 51 915 [168] Wittmer J P, Meyer H, Johner A, Obukhov S and Baschnagel J 2013 J. Chem. Phys. 139 217101 [169] Halverson J D, Lee W B, Grest G S, Grosberg A Y and Kremer K 2013 J. Chem. Phys. 139 217102 [170] Shakhnovich E 2006 Chem. Rev. 106 1559 [171] Govorun E, Ivanov V, Khokhlov A, Khalatur P, Borovinsky A and Grosberg A 2001 Phys. Rev. E 64 040903 [172] Peng C-K, Buldyrev S V, Goldberger A, Havlin S, Sciortino F, Simons M and Stanley H 1992 Nature 356 168 [173] Nazarov L, Tamm M V, Nechaev S K and Avetisov V A 2013 arXiv:1311.7689

[147] Suzuki J, Takano A, Deguchi T and Matsushita Y 2009 J. Chem. Phys. 131 144902 [148] Hur K, Jeong C, Winkler R G, Lacevic N, Gee R H and Yoon D Y 2011 Macromolecules 44 2311 [149] Rosa A and Everaers R 2013 arXiv:1310.7641 [150] Rubinstein M 2012 Conf. Genome Mechanics at the Nuclear Scale (Leiden, 11 Dec.) talk [151] Smrek J and Grosberg A Y 2013 unpublished [152] Dobrynin A V, Rubinstein M and Obukhov S P 1996 Macromolecules 29 2974 [153] Micka U, Holm C and Kremer K 1999 Langmuir 15 4033 [154] Spiteri M, Williams C E and Boue F 2007 Macromolecules 40 6679 [155] Mann B, Kremer K, Lenz O and Holm C 2011 Macromol. Theory Simul. 20 721 [156] Mirny L 2012 private communication [157] Therizols P, Duong T, Dujon B, Zimmer C and Fabre E 2010 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107 2025 [158] Bolzer T A et al 2005 PLoS Biol. 3 e157 [159] Neer A, Baran N and Manor H 1977 Cell 11 65 [160] des Cloizeaux J and Jannink G 2010 Polymers in Solution: their Modelling and Structure (Oxford: Oxford University Press)
