[Page 1]

RESEARCH ARTICLE

BIOPHYSICS AND COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY

OPEN ACCESS

Heterogeneous elasticity drives ripening and controls bursting kinetics of transcriptional condensates Lingyu Meng (孟令羽 )a ID , Sheng Mao (毛晟 )b,1 ID , and Jie Lin ( 林杰 )a,c,1 ID Edited by Mehran Kardar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA; received September 24, 2023; accepted February 10, 2024

Many biomolecular condensates, including transcriptional condensates, are formed in elastic mediums. In this work, we study the nonequilibrium condensate dynamics in a chromatin-like environment modeled as a heterogeneous elastic medium. We demonstrate that the ripening process in such an elastic medium exhibits a temporal power-law scaling of the average condensate radius, depending on the local stiffness distribution and different from Ostwald ripening. Moreover, we incorporate an active process to model the dissolution of transcriptional condensates upon RNA accumulation. Intriguingly, three types of kinetics of condensate growth emerge, corresponding to constitutively expressed, transcriptional-bursting, and silenced genes. Furthermore, the simulated burst frequency decreases exponentially with the local stiffness, through which we infer a lognormal distribution of local stiffness in living cells using the transcriptome-wide distribution of burst frequency. Under the inferred stiffness distribution, the simulated distributions of bursting kinetic parameters agree reasonably well with the experimental data. Our findings reveal the interplay between biomolecular condensates and elastic mediums, yielding far-reaching implications for gene expression.

phase separation | elastic ripening | transcription | chromatin | gene regulation

Biomolecular condensates are membraneless cellular compartments with many essential physiological functions, such as stress adaptation, acceleration of biochemical reactions, and noise reduction (1–6). Specifically, transcriptional condensates comprised of RNA polymerases (RNAPs) are observed in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes (7–12), suggesting a pivotal role of RNAP condensates in gene expression regulation. Biomolecular condensates are droplets formed via phase separation (1, 2, 13–16). Classical theories predominantly consider liquid droplets in a liquid environment at or evolving toward thermal equilibrium (16–18). In a liquid environment, condensate-forming molecules migrate from smaller to larger condensates to reduce the total surface energy, known as Ostwald ripening. Nevertheless, in many cases, the surrounding environments of biomolecular condensates are not simple viscous liquids, such as the nucleoplasm filled with chromatin. It is known that the local stiffness of the elastic medium can affect the condensates’ growth and ripening (19–26). In particular, light-activated condensates in vivo were constrained by chromatin as the condensates could only stay in the chromatin-sparse region (23). Experiments also demonstrated that the condensateforming molecules flow from condensates in stiff medium to those in soft medium, signifying a ripening driving force underpinned by elasticity (27, 28). However, it is still unclear whether the elastic driving force generates any novel universality class of ripening beyond the Ostwald ripening. Furthermore, numerous out-of-equilibrium processes consume energy in living cells. In particular, the effects of active chemical reactions consuming energy on the formation and morphologies of condensates have been intensely investigated recently (29–31). One notable outcome of active chemical reactions is the emergence of multiple coexisting stable condensates, beyond the predictions of Ostwald ripening (1, 32–35). Alternative mechanisms to generate coexisting condensates have also been proposed, e.g., through the strain-stiffening elasticity of the surrounding network (20, 22, 25), which do not consume energy. In the meantime, other out-of-equilibrium processes also play crucial roles in condensate formation and dissolution. For example, recent experiments observed that RNAP condensates can dissolve due to the accumulation of transcribed mRNAs, which is also an active process consuming energy (36). In this work, we study the out-of-equilibrium dynamics of biomolecular condensates, particularly transcriptional condensates, in a chromatin-like medium modeled as a heterogeneous elastic medium. We use a mean-field-like model of condensate growth to simultaneously simulate numerous condensates in a heterogeneous elastic medium,

Significance Biomolecular condensates often exist in elastic mediums, such as transcriptional condensates; however, traditional theories of phase separation are limited to liquid environments. Here, we study the dynamical behaviors of condensates in a chromatin-like environment modeled as a heterogeneous elastic medium. We demonstrate that the ripening process in such an elastic medium exhibits a temporal power-law scaling of the average condensate radius. Moreover, by introducing an active process to model the dissolution of transcriptional condensates beyond thermal equilibrium, we uncover three distinct kinetics of condensate growth, corresponding to different gene expression temporal patterns, with the distributions of kinetic parameters in agreement with experimental data. Our work demonstrates the intricate interplay between biomolecular condensates and elastic mediums.

Author contributions: L.M., S.M., and J.L. designed research; L.M. and J.L. performed research; L.M. and J.L. analyzed data; and L.M., S.M., and J.L. wrote the paper. The authors declare no competing interest. This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND). 1 To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email:

maosheng@pku.edu.cn or linjie@pku.edu.cn. This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas. 2316610121/-/DCSupplemental. Published March 15, 2024.

[Page 2]

beyond conventional phase-field simulations’ computational capability (16), which turns out to be crucial for measuring the scaling exponents accurately, as we show later. We mainly focus on a neo-Hookean elastic medium in which the local stiffness (i.e., the local elastic pressure) around each condensate is time-independent but different across different condensates. Surprisingly, we find a temporal power-law scaling of the average condensate radius during the ripening phase induced by heterogeneous elasticity, hRi ∼ t α , which we denote as elastic ripening. The α exponent depends on the distribution of local stiffness; specifically, we prove that given a power-law distribution of local stiffness P(E) ∼ E θ , α = (1 + θ)/(5 + 2θ), beyond the 1/3 exponent in the classical Ostwald ripening. Numerical simulations nicely confirm our theoretical predictions. The elastic ripening process observed in this work is similar to the previous experimental observations in synthetic polymer networks (28). Nevertheless, one should notice that the elastic ripening process in ref. 28 is induced by stiffness with macroscopic gradients instead of heterogeneous stiffnesses different for each condensate. To incorporate biological activity, we introduce a nonequilibrium dissolution process to the model: Condensates dissolve at a rate proportional to their volume, inspired by experiments in which transcribed mRNAs can dissolve transcriptional condensates (36). Interestingly, depending on the local stiffness around condensates, the condensates can grow immediately after dissolution, grow intermittently, or be suppressed entirely, which we propose to correspond to constitutively expressed, transcriptional-bursting, and silenced genes. Furthermore, for condensates corresponding to transcriptional bursting, the burst frequency decays exponentially with the local stiffness, through which we infer the local stiffness distribution in vivo based on the transcriptome-wide distribution of burst frequency (37). Under the inferred stiffness distribution, which is lognormal, the simulated distributions of kinetic characteristics of bursting condensates, including the burst frequency, time until burst, and burst duration, match the experimental data reasonably well. By incorporating random local stiffness and active dissolution, our work unveils the intricate interplay between phase separation kinetics and elastic mediums, predicts a new universality class of elastic ripening, and underscores the crucial role of chromatin stiffness in gene expression regulation through condensate formation. Results The Condensate Growth Model. We propose a mean-field-like

model to describe the growth dynamics of condensates in a heterogeneous elastic medium. The concentration of the condensate-forming biomolecule inside condensates is fixed at cin , and all condensates share a common outside concentration cout (Fig. 1). The model is mean-field-like because we neglect the spatial fluctuation of the outside concentration, justified by the phase-field simulations in which a virtually uniform outside concentration is observed (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). A uniform outside concentration is biologically reasonable because the typical protein diffusion constant in vivo is about 1 μm2 /s, which means that it takes seconds for a protein to fully explore the space inside a cell such as the nucleus (38). We assume near-equilibrium dynamics so that the changing rate of the ith condensate’s volume is proportional to the derivative of free energy against its volume, what about surface tension?

1 ∂F ∂Vi tot = −kVi 3 = kVi 3 (g − pc,i ), ∂t ∂Vi Vj6=i

Elastic Network

Fig. 1. Biomolecular condensates grow in the interspace of a heterogeneous elastic medium. Each condensate has a fixed inside concentration cin and a shared outside concentration cout . Condensates’ growth is suppressed by the surrounding elastic medium through an elastic pressure, which can be different among condensates.

where Ftot is the total free energy of the whole system, a function of all condensates’ volume V1 , V2 , ..., VN . Here, ∂Ftot /∂Vi is defined as the net change of the total free energy divided by a small change in Vi given that the volumes of other condensates are fixed. Because the concentration inside condensates is fixed, a change in condensate volume will also lead to a change in the molecule number. Therefore, the derivative ∂Ftot /∂Vi in Eq. 1 is a combination of osmotic pressure and chemical potential. Here, g is the reduced free energy per unit volume, excluding the elastic and surface energy, which we call condensing affinity and

cout g = cin kB T ln − kB T (cout − c0 ). c0 because they ignored the surface tension...

Interestingly, g turns out to be the same for all condensates. Here, c0 is the saturated concentration of phase separation and g = 0 when cout = c0 as expected (see detailed derivations in Materials and Methods). The confining pressure pc,i = this should be 2γ[4π/(3Vi )]1/3 + Ei . The first term is the Laplace pressure, compensated by the surface and γ is the surface tension. Ei is the local elastic pressure tension due to the surrounding medium, which we call local stiffness 1/3 in the following. The Vi factor on the right side of Eq. 1 comes from the spherical geometry. The particle flux entering an absorbing sphere is proportional to its radius in three dimensions: J ∝ 1/R × R 2 ∼ R where 1/R is for the concentration gradient 1/3 and R 2 is for the surface area. As we show later, this Vi factor is critical to obtain the correct scaling of the Ostwald ripening in a medium without heterogeneous elasticity (16–18, 39). In the following, we nondimensionalize the condensate growth model so that all the variables become dimensionless by selecting the −1/3 energy unit ε0 = kB T , the length unit l0 = c0 and the time unit t0 = 1/[(4π/3) kc0 l0 kB T ]. In this work, we mainly focus on the nucleation and growth regime of phase separation because the average concentrations of condensate-forming molecules in vivo are typically far from the spinodal regime (40, 41). We introduce a fixed number of nucleation sites, and each site has a fixed nucleation radius Rn , which can be related to the lengths of specific DNA sequences, such as promoters (12). A condensate is initiated at a nucleation site if the condensing affinity overcomes the local confining

[Page 3]

pressure. A condensate is considered dissolved if its volume is below the cutoff volume Vn = 4πRn3 /3. We note that the inside concentration cin (relative to the saturated concentration) of transcription-related condensates can vary from 3 to 30 (11, 20, 36); therefore, we set cin = 10 in the following numerical simulations. We set the initial outside concentration cout, ini = 2. cout is calculated as (cout,ini Vtot − PN PN i=1 cin Vi )/(Vtot − i=1 Vi ), where N is the total number of nucleation sites. Vi is a condensate’s volume and Vtot is the total system volume, which we set as Vtot = 103 N . Neither Vi nor Vtot include the nucleation site volumes, which are typically very small. If we use a reasonable length unit l0 ≈ 40 nm (19), the dimensionless surface tension γ = 0.1 corresponds to 2.6×10−7 N/m, within the range of the experimental values 10−7 to 10−5 N/m (42, 43). We define Rc ≡ 2γ/gini , where gini is the initial condensing affinity so that Rc is the minimum nucleation radius for the condensate to grow at the beginning of the simulation in the absence of elastic pressure.

Elastic Ripening. We use the neo-Hookean elasticity to model

the elastic medium in the following. For simplicity, we consider the local stiffness (i.e., the local elastic pressure) to be timeindependent, based on the assumption that condensate sizes are larger than the pore size of the elastic network (25, 44). To mimic the heterogeneity of local stiffness in the nucleus, e.g., due to the spatial organization of euchromatin and heterochromatin, we assign each condensate a random local stiffness Ei . In the case of Ostwald ripening, corresponding to the case of homogeneous elastic medium, small condensates shrink while big condensates grow as this ripening process reduces the overall surface energy. During the Ostwald ripening, the average of those surviving condensates’ radii exhibits power-law scaling with time, hRi ∼ (γt)1/3 (16–18, 39). For a heterogeneous elastic medium, we expect a similar ripening process in which condensates with strong local stiffness shrink and condensates with weak local stiffness grow since this process reduces the overall elastic energy, which we denote as elastic ripening. As time passes, the number of surviving condensates decreases, the average radius over surviving condensates increases, and the average local stiffness over surviving condensates decreases. In Ostwald ripening, the coarsening of condensates is driven by surface tension, and it is a self-similar (i.e., scale-invariant) process (16–18). Therefore, we propose that elastic ripening is also a self-similar process. The self-similarity is reflected by the distribution of the condensate radius, which has the form P(R, t) = hRi f ( hRi ). Therefore, only one characteristic radius exists: the average condensate radius hRi that changes with time. In a heterogeneous elastic medium, the distribution of local stiffness for surviving condensates during elastic ripening should also be self-similar such that P(E, t) = hEi g( hEi ) where hEi is the average local stiffness that changes with time. Similar to Ostwald ripening, we propose that the average condensate radius and local stiffness should exhibit power-law scalings with time during elastic ripening, hRi ∼ t α , hEi ∼ t

−β

.

Here, α and β are the two power-law exponents to be determined. In the following, we take a power-law distribution of local stiffness, P(E) ∼ E θ without losing generality (which we will explain later in this section). Notice that a uniform distribution

of local stiffness corresponds to θ = 0. We theoretically derive relationships between α, β, and θ based on the following relations: hṘ 2 i ∼ hĖi ⇒ β = 1 − 2α,

hEi(1+θ ) hRi3 ∼ Const ⇒ β = 3α/(1 + θ).

Here, Eq. 5 comes from energy conservation: The dissipation

∂F V̇ /V ∼ V̇ 2 /V 3 ∼ Ṙ 2 power per unit volume W = − ∂V must be equal to the elastic energy changing rate per unit volume, which is Ė. Here, we have used the changing rate of ∂F . Eq. 6 comes from mass condensate volume: V̇ ∼ −V 3 ∂V conservation: The total volume of the surviving condensates, which can be approximated as Nsurvive hV i, should remain constant during ripening. As a self-similar power-law distribution, P(E) ∼ hEi g( hEi ) ∼ hEiEθ+1 . Furthermore, Nsurvive P(E)dE is independent of time because it is simply the number of condensates with local stiffness between E and E + dE, which is set by the distribution of local stiffness over all nucleation sites and the total number of nucleation sites. Therefore, we expect that the number of surviving condensates decreases with time and follows the scaling relationship Nsurvive ∼ hEi(1+θ ) . Using hV i ∼ hRi3 (note that hR 3 i and hRi3 have the same temporal scaling due to the self-similarity of the radius distribution function), we obtain Eq. 6. Solving Eqs. 5 and 6, we predict the following power-law scalings during elastic ripening: 1+θ

hRi ∼ t 5+2θ , hEi ∼ t

− 5+2θ

.

We simulate the condensate growth model (Materials and Methods) and confirm the elastic ripening process (Fig. 2A and Movie S1): Condensates with large E shrink while condensates with small E grow (SI Appendix, Fig. S4). Our theoretical predictions are well confirmed: The average condensate radius and the average local stiffness exhibit the predicted θ-dependent power-law scalings with time (Fig. 2 B–E). To verify our model, we also include the simulations in which Ei = 0 for all condensates (the E = 0 line in Fig. 2B). As expected, we obtain the 1/3 scaling of Ostwald ripening. In Fig. 2, we calculate the average over all condensates weighted by their volumes, so the contribution of dissolved condensates with V = Vn is negligible. Thus, we do not need to exclude dissolved condensates explicitly. We note that the volume-weighted average does not affect the dynamical scalings due to the self-similarity of elastic ripening (see a detailed proof in Materials and Methods). We also implement the non-volume-weighted average by explicitly excluding dissolved condensates and confirm that the volumeweighted and non-volume-weighted averages share the same scalings (SI Appendix, Fig. S5). Furthermore, the distributions of the normalized condensate radius and local stiffness R/hRi, E/hEi at different times for the surviving condensates indeed overlap, confirming the selfsimilarity property of elastic ripening (Fig. 3). Notably, the distribution of R/hRi when θ = 0 can be calculated semi-analytically, as the gray dashed line in Fig. 3A (SI Appendix). As a result of selfsimilarity, the SD of condensates’ radii σR has the same scaling as hRi, and the same for σE and E (SI Appendix, Fig. S6). We numerically confirm the mass conservation condition, Eq. 6 (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). Furthermore, our results are independent of the values of cin (SI Appendix, Fig. S8) and are still valid if the nucleation radii have randomness (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). We also

[Page 4]

10 0

10 -2 10 1

10 0

10 -4

Simulation Prediction

10 2

10 4

10 6

10 8

Simulation Prediction

Fig. 2. Elastic ripening in a heterogeneous elastic medium. (A) Visualization of simulation results based on the condensate growth model. The systems undergo ripening until only one condensate survives. Note that the positions of these condensates are generated randomly, and only a small subset of condensates are shown. (B) The local stiffness, i.e., the local elastic pressure E , obeys a power-law distribution P(E ) ∼ E θ . During elastic ripening, the average radius exhibits a power-law scaling with time, hRi ∼ t α , where the exponent α depends on θ . In the case of E = 0, we set Ei = 0 for all condensates and obtain the 1/3 scaling of Ostwald ripening as expected. (C) The average local stiffness hEi also exhibits a power law scaling with time, hEi ∼ t −β . (D) The simulated exponents α as a function of θ agree well with the theoretical predictions. (E) The simulated exponents β as a function of θ also agree well with the theoretical predictions. In all panels, the radii of nucleation sites Rn = 1.5Rc where Rc = 2γ/gini . For the case of E = 0, we add randomness to Rn so that it is uniformly distributed from Rc to 2Rc to avoid deterministic dynamics. In all panels, E ∈ [0, 2]. In (B)–(E), the total number of nucleation sites is 5 × 105 .

notice the prefactors, which we do not include in the power-law scalings of Eqs. 7 and 8, depend on the maximum of the local stiffness distribution (SI Appendix, Fig. S10). Given an arbitrary distribution of local stiffness, we expect that it is the asymptotic behavior, P(E) ∼ (E − Emin )θ for E → Emin that determines the long-timescale power-law scaling where Emin is the minimum of local stiffness (in our previous simulations, Emin = 0). For example, if P(E → Emin ) is finite, hRi ∼ t 1/5 , corresponding to θ = 0. We confirm this prediction by simulating exponential and decreasing power-law distributions of local stiffness where P(E → Emin ) is finite (SI Appendix, Fig. S11). We also simulate Gamma distributions of local stiffness where P(E) ∼ E k−1 e−E/l , and confirm that it is the asymptotic power-law behavior of the distribution that determines the ripening exponent (SI Appendix, Fig. S12). We also study a Gaussian distribution of local stiffness. Interestingly, for a truncated Gaussian distribution with P(E = 0) > 0, we obtain hRi ∼ t 1/5 , corresponding to θ = 0 (SI Appendix, Fig. S13). In contrast, for a Gaussian distribution with its means far from the origin, such that P(E = 0) → 0, we obtain hRi ∼ t 1/2 , corresponding to the limit θ → ∞ (SI Appendix, Fig. S13). It has been shown that a strain-stiffening medium can suppress ripening (20, 22, 25). To study the strain-stiffening effect, we modify the elastic pressure to Ei + YRi so that it increases with the condensate radius, in agreement with recent molecular dynamical simulations (22). Here, Y can be a constant or a random value correlated with E. In both scenarios, the average radius first follows the elastic ripening scaling and then saturates to a plateau. The system eventually reaches an equilibrium state

where multiple condensates coexist (SI Appendix, Figs. S14 and S15 and Movie S2). Transcriptional Condensates as Actively Dissolving Condensates. So far, we have analyzed the ripening dynamics of conden-

sates as the system approaches thermal equilibrium, governed by the gradient of free energy. However, biological systems are often out of equilibrium. For example, transcriptional condensates can dissolve because of the accumulation of transcribed RNAs (36), and this active dissolution process makes the system depart from thermal equilibrium. In the following, we incorporate this active dissolution process to model the nonequilibrium dynamics of transcriptional condensates. We expect that the transcription rate and the number of RNA molecules inside a condensate positively correlate with its volume, and so does the condensate dissolution rate. For simplicity, we consider a simple scenario in which the dissolution rate is proportional to the condensate volume and will discuss other scenarios later. We model the active dissolution as a stochastic process such that each condensate has a constant rate per unit time to dissolve as kdis V (see details of numerical simulations in Materials and Methods). We assume the dissolution to be instantaneous because of fast protein diffusion (38, 45). Once a condensate dissolves, we set its volume to the cutoff value Vn = 4πRn3 /3, and the outside concentration increases due to the release of molecules from dissolved condensates. The dissolved condensates reinitiate growth if the outside concentration is high enough such that the condensing affinity is above the sum of the Laplace pressure (set by the same nucleation radius as the initial condition) and

[Page 5]

Probability density

Probability density

Probability density

Probability density

Probability density

Probability density

Probability density

Probability density

Fig. 3. Self-similarity during elastic ripening. (A) Distributions of the normalized radii R/hRi for θ = 0 from t = 1,000 to t = 4,000 with a fixed interval converge to a universal distribution, exhibiting scale invariance. The gray dashed line is the theoretical prediction (SI Appendix). Inset: The raw distributions of R at different times. (B) Distributions of the normalized local stiffness E/hEi for θ = 0 from t = 1,000 to t = 4,000 with a fixed interval converge to a universal distribution, exhibiting scale invariance. Inset: The raw distributions of E at different times. (C) The same analysis as (A) for θ = 1. (D) The same analysis as (B) for θ = 1. In this figure, hRi and hEi are calculated as the non-volume-weighted averages. In all panels, the radii of nucleation sites Rn = 1.5Rc . In all panels, E ∈ [0, 2] and the total number of nucleation sites is 5 × 105 .

the elastic pressure. We expect the number of transcriptional condensates in the nucleus of a living cell to be comparable to the number of genes, as the promoter of each gene is a potential nucleation site for transcriptional condensates. Therefore, we set the number of nucleation sites as N = 104 in the simulations as the typical number of genes for mammalian cells.

Transcriptional Bursting Kinetics. Interestingly, the growth dy-

namics of transcriptional condensates in a heterogeneous elastic medium can be categorized into three cases. Condensates at nucleation sites with weak local stiffness E grow almost immediately after dissolution; condensates at nucleation sites why the delay? with intermediate E grow after a delay since the last dissolution; condensates at nucleation sites with large E never grow (the Upper part of Fig. 4A). Intriguingly, these three cases can be mapped to three different gene expression kinetics: constitutively expressed genes, transcriptional-bursting genes, and silenced genes (see the details of mapping in Materials and Methods and Fig. 4A). Understanding the kinetics of transcription has been a central challenge in the study of stochastic gene expression. Notably, a bursting gene switches between the active and inactive states stochastically and is transcribed only when in the active state. Multiple mechanisms for transcriptional bursting have been proposed, such as histone modifications and transcription factor availability (37, 46–48). Our results suggest that the local stiffness

of chromatin provides a mechanical way to regulate transcription kinetics. Intriguingly, we find that the probability density of the fluctuating condensing affinity over time has an exponential tail for large g (Fig. 4B). Notably, the exponential decay rate is insensitive to local stiffness distribution as we tune the exponent θ in the local stiffness distribution, P(E) ∼ E θ , and find a robust decay rate. Meanwhile, the burst frequency of a transcriptional condensate, i.e., the probability per unit time for condensate to reinitiate its growth after dissolution, is proportional to the probability for the current condensing affinity to be above R∞ the confining pressure, that is, 2γ/Rn +E P(g)dg. Therefore, the exponential distribution of g leads to the exponential dependence of burst frequency on local stiffness with the same exponential decay rate. We confirm numerically the exponential dependence of burst frequency on the local stiffness, which indeed has the same decay rate as P(g) (Fig. 4C). Based on this relationship between stiffness and burst frequency, we infer the in vivo distribution of local stiffness from the transcriptome-wide distribution of burst frequency in primary mouse fibroblasts from ref. 37. Intriguingly, we find that the local stiffness distribution can be well approximated by a lognormal distribution, which cannot be experimentally measured yet (Fig. 5A) and the mapping from the condensate dynamics to different gene expression kinetics is also valid for a lognormal distribution of local stiffness (SI Appendix, Fig. S16). Using the inferred

[Page 6]

Bursting

Silenced

5 104 0

5 104 0

5 104

log(counts)

log(burst frequency)

A Constitutive

Fig. 4. Dynamics of condensate growth and dissolution. (A) Upper: Condensates with weak local stiffness, i.e., small E , grow almost immediately after dissolution and can be associated with constitutively expressed genes; condensates with intermediate local stiffness grow intermittently with a delay since the last dissolution and can be associated with transcriptional-bursting genes; condensates with strong local stiffness never grow, representing silenced genes that are not expressed. Lower: Phase diagram of condensate dynamics as a function of the local stiffness E given a fixed nucleation radius Rn (normalized by Rc ) for all nucleation sites. The purple, blue, and gray regions represent condensates associated with constitutively expressed, transcriptional-bursting, and silenced genes. (B) The probability of the condensing affinity g decays exponentially for large g . The decay rate is insensitive to the distribution of E as we find the same decay rate for multiple power-law distributions of local stiffness P(E ) ∼ E θ , with different θ exponents. The lower x-axis limit corresponds to the smallest confining pressure over all nucleation sites. (C) The burst frequency of bursting condensates decays exponentially with E , with the same decay rate as the probability distribution of g . In this panel, each dot is a bursting condensate. In the Upper part of (A), Rn = 8Rc . In all panels, P(E ) ∼ E θ in the range [0, 1]. In (A), θ = 2. In (B) and (C), Rn = 5Rc . In all panels, kdis = 10−7 and the number of nucleation sites N = 104 .

stiffness distribution, we compare the statistical properties of bursting condensates in our simulations to the experimental data (see the simulation and calculation details in Materials and Methods), including the burst frequency, time until burst (the average interval between two consecutive bursts), and burst duration (the average lifetime of bursts). Remarkably, without any further fitting, the distributions of all these quantities agree reasonably well with the experimental data (Fig. 5 B–D). These results suggest that our condensate growth model with active dissolution in a heterogeneous elastic medium captures (at least) some basic features of transcriptional bursting in living cells. We note that the physical value of the local stiffness depends on the length unit l0 . For l0 ≈ 40 nm, the unit of the local stiffness is about 65 Pa. Meanwhile, we note that the absolute value of the local stiffness is not critical to our conclusions. Our main results are still valid if we shift the inferred lognormal distribution of E to increase the average local stiffness (SI Appendix, Fig. S17). To test the robustness of our conclusions, we also study an alternative active dissolution model in which the dissolution rate per unit time is kdis V 3/2 and find that our main results, including the exponential relationship between burst frequency and local stiffness and the lognormal distribution of local stiffness in vivo, remain valid (SI Appendix, Figs. S18 and S19). Our results are also valid with a different cin (SI Appendix, Figs. S20 and S21). However, our simulation results are inconsistent with the experimental observations if the dissolution rate per unit time is a constant (SI Appendix, Figs. S22 and S23) or decreases with volume as kdis V −1 (SI Appendix, Fig. S24), indicating a restriction on the selection of dissolution dynamics. Discussion In this work, we systematically investigate the dynamical behaviors of biomolecular condensates in a heterogeneous elastic medium. The condensate growth model allows us to incorporate heterogeneous local stiffness and biological activities. Solving this model numerically, we find dynamical scalings for elastic ripening and theoretically derive the exponents based on energy conservation and mass conservation. The ripening process driven

by the heterogeneous local stiffness we observe in this work is similar to the elastic ripening observed in synthetic polymer networks with stiffness gradients (27, 28). In both cases, heterogeneous stiffness accelerates the ripening process compared with a homogeneous system. In this work, we further show that the universality of elastic ripening is distinct from the Ostwald ripening with different exponents. Our theoretical predictions and numerical simulations nicely agree with each other. To incorporate biological activity, we also introduce a constant dissolution rate per unit volume to each condensate to model the dissolution of transcriptional condensates in vivo due to RNA accumulation (36). This active dissolution process drives the system out of equilibrium. Intriguingly, the temporal growth patterns of condensates resemble gene expression dynamics. Condensates in soft regions with weak local stiffness keep growing and continue to grow almost immediately after dissolution, corresponding to constitutively expressed genes. Meanwhile, condensates with stronger local stiffness initiate growth after a delay since the last dissolution, corresponding to transcriptionalbursting genes, which switch between active and inactive states and initiate transcription only in the active state. If the local stiffness is too strong, condensates can never grow, corresponding to silenced genes that are not expressed. Intriguingly, the burst frequency of bursting condensates is an exponential function of local stiffness by which we infer the distribution of local stiffness in vivo as a lognormal distribution using the transcriptome-wide data (37). Given the inferred stiffness distribution, the simulated distributions of multiple characteristics of transcriptional bursting, including the burst frequency, match the experimental ones well. Our results suggest that the local mechanical properties of chromatin play a key role in regulating gene expression kinetics. In particular, a strong local stiffness suppresses the burst frequency of nearby genes. Meanwhile, it has been shown that burst frequency is primarily encoded in enhancers (37). It will be interesting to explore further the potential connection between enhancer sequences and local stiffness. We remark the average number of mRNAs produced during each burst, i.e., the burst size, is beyond the scope of our model.

[Page 7]

Probability density

Probability density

Inferred from experiment Lognormal distribution

Experiment Simulation

log10(burst frequency) (1/h)

Experiment Simulation

Probability density

Probability density

Time until burst (h)

Experiment Simulation

Burst duration (h)

Fig. 5. Comparison between experiments and simulations of transcriptional bursting kinetics. (A) The inferred distribution of E from the burst frequency of the experimental data can be well approximated by a lognormal distribution generated by exp[μ + σ N (0, 1)] with μ = −1.6 and σ = 0.4, where N (0, 1) is the standard normal random number. (B) Given the lognormal distribution of local stiffness, the simulated distribution of the burst frequency of bursting condensates agrees well with the experimental distribution. (C) Similar to (B) but for the distribution of time until burst. (D) Similar to (B) but for the distribution of burst duration. In this figure, the experimental data are from the transcriptome-wide data of primary mouse fibroblasts (37). In (B)–(D), the radii of nucleation sites Rn = 5Rc , kdis = 10−7 and the number of nucleation sites N = 104 . In (B)–(D), the stiffness distribution is the same as (A). The calculation details of bursting kinetics are included in Materials and Methods. Here, we plot the simulation results in the unit of an hour to be consistent with experimental data, corresponding to the time unit of our model t0 = 1.08 s. For the three distributions of bursting kinetics, we calculate the Kullback–Leibler divergence between the experimental and simulated distributions and find that their values are relatively low: 0.043 (B), 0.006 (C), and 0.809 (D), respectively (Materials and Methods).

Biologically, the burst size is related to the mRNA synthesis efficiency encoded in the promoter sequences. Interestingly, the burst size in the experimental data from ref. 37 has a low correlation with the burst duration, which means that the mRNA synthesis rate mainly determines the burst size during the active state. We note that the distribution of condensate lifetimes from our simulations is also qualitatively similar to the experimental data of Pol II condensates in live mouse embryonic stem cells from ref. 9 (SI Appendix, Fig. S25). We also notice an interesting nonequilibrium effect in our model where the growth initiation of a subset of nucleation sites can be synchronized, and a powerlaw scaling exists between the synchronization period and the dissolution rate (SI Appendix, Figs. S26 and S27). Some questions remain regarding the connection of our results to real transcriptional condensates. In the experiments by Cho et al., it was found that stable and large condensates that virtually do not dissolve within the experimental time window coexist with smaller condensates that dissolve frequently (9), indicating that the nonequilibrium dissolution process of transcriptional condensates can be more complex than our simplified assumptions. The coalescence of condensates is also not included in our model. Recently, Lee et al. (23) found a new

dynamical scaling of ripening generated by the coalescence of subdiffusive condensates. In the future, exploring the interference of elastic ripening, driven by the gradient of local stiffness and the subdiffusion of condensates themselves, will also be interesting. Materials and Methods Detailed Derivation of the Condensate Growth Model. Thetotalfreeenergy

of the whole system is defined as the sum of free energies of all condensates and the dilute phase, Ftot = Fi (Vi , Ni ) + Fout (Vout , Nout ).

Here, the index i represents the ith condensate; Vout and Nout are the volume and molecule number of the dilute phase. To derive the condensing affinity g, we ignore the confining pressure, which is included in Eq. 1 as a separate term. Given a small volume change of a particular condensate dVi , the corresponding change of the molecule number inside the condensate is dNi = cin dVi where cin is the inside concentration, which is constant. Meanwhile, the volume change and the molecule number change of the dilute phase are −dVi and −dNi , respectively. Thus, the change of the total free energy Ftot is

[Page 8]

∂Fi ∂Fi dVi + dN ∂Vi Ni ∂Ni Vi i

∂Fout ∂Fout − dV − dN ∂Vout Nout i ∂Nout Vout i " #

∂Fi ∂Fout = cin dVi − ∂Ni Vi ∂Nout Vout "

# ∂Fi ∂Fout + dVi − ∂Vi Ni ∂Vout Nout

dFtot =

= {cin [μin,i − μout ] − Πin,i + Πout }dVi .

∂Fi ∂Fout Here, μin,i = ∂N and μout = ∂N are the chemical potentials of

out

Vi

Vout

the condensate-forming molecules in the and the dilute phase.

ith condensate

∂Fi Πin,i = − ∂V

Ni

∂Fout and Πout = − ∂V

out

Nout

are the osmotic pressures

inside the ith condensate and the dilute phase. Thus, the condensing affinity gi becomes

gi = cin [μout − μin,i ] + Πin,i − Πout .

Next, we use the Gibbs-Duhem equation (49), Ndμ = −SdT + VdΠ such that μin,i = μ0 + (Πin,i − Π0 )/cin where μ0 and Π0 are the chemical potential and osmotic pressure at equilibrium in the thermodynamic limit, respectively. Regarding the chemical potential and the pressure outside condensates, we have dμout = kB Tdcout /cout and dΠout = cout dμout . Here, we have used the dilute solution assumption for dμout and the Gibbs-Duhem relation for dΠout . Integrating cout from c0 , the saturation concentration at equilibrium in the thermodynamic limit, we obtain μout = μ0 + kB T ln(cout /c0 ) and Πout = Π0 + kB T(cout − c0 ). Combining all the above results, we obtain

cout − kB T(cout − c0 ), g = cin kB T ln c0

Details of Numerical Simulations and Data Analysis. We perform numeri-

cal simulations by solving Eq. 1 using the explicit Euler method on MATLAB. In Fig. 2, we compute the volume-weighted averages for the average condensate radius and local stiffness. We remark that the volume-weighted average and the non-volume-weighted average share the same scaling due to the self-similarity of the distribution of condensate radius and local stiffness, 1 f ( R ) where hRi is the non-volume-weighted average of e.g., P(R) = hRi hRi radius. The volume-weight-averaged Rradius is simply proportional to the non4

x4 f (x)dx × hRi, where the prefactor is x f (x)dx

volume-weighted average: hR3 i = R 3

a constant. A similar argument applies to the volume-weighted average of the local stiffness.

This divergence is nonnegative and equals 0 only if the two distributions are identical. Data, Materials, and Software Availability. The codes of our simulations

are available at https://github.com/LingyuMeng99/Condensate-SurroundingElasticity (50).

which is the same for all condensates.

hR i

To simulate actively dissolving condensates, we generate a uniform random number from 0 to 1 for each condensate at each time step, and a condensate is considered dissolved if the random number is smaller than kdis Vdt where dt is the time step. Once a condense dissolves, we set its volume as the cutoff volume Vn = 4πRn3 /3. In Fig. 4A, a condensate is mapped to a transcriptional-bursting gene if its average time between dissolution and the next growth initiation is larger than its average lifetime according to the experimental data in ref. 37. Meanwhile, a condensate is mapped to a silenced gene if it never grows during the simulation. Finally, the rest of the condensates correspond to constitutively expressed genes. In Figs. 4C and 5B, a condensate’s burst frequency is calculated as the inverse of the average interval between dissolution and the next growth initiation. In Fig. 5C, the time until burst is calculated as the average interval from dissolution to the next initiation. In Fig. 5D, the burst duration is calculated as the average lifetime for a bursting condensate. In the simulations of Fig. 5, Rn and kdis are determined independently of the comparison between simulations and experiments. We choose Rn = 5Rc since the nucleation radius does not affect the border between the constitutive and transcriptional-bursting condensates (SI Appendix, Fig. S16). The parameter kdis is determined by ensuring that the averaged ratio across condensates between the burst frequency and the off rate, i.e., the inverse of the burst duration, matches the experimental ratio. To quantify the similarity between our simulation results and experimental data, we utilize the Kullback–Leibler divergence, which describes the distance between two probability distributions:

Pexp (x) dx. D = Pexp (x) ln Psimul (x)

C. P. Brangwynne et al., Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution/condensation. Science 324, 1729–1732 (2009). A. A. Hyman, C. A. Weber, F. Jülicher, Liquid-liquid phase separation in biology. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 30, 39–58 (2014). S. F. Banani, H. O. Lee, A. A. Hyman, M. K. Rosen, Biomolecular condensates: Organizers of cellular biochemistry. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 285–298 (2017). S. Alberti, A. Gladfelter, T. Mittag, Considerations and challenges in studying liquid-liquid phase separation and biomolecular condensates. Cell 176, 419–434 (2019). A. Klosin et al., Phase separation provides a mechanism to reduce noise in cells. Science 367, 464–468 (2020). S. Alberti, A. A. Hyman, Biomolecular condensates at the nexus of cellular stress, protein aggregation disease and ageing. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 196–213 (2021). X. Weng et al., Spatial organization of RNA polymerase and its relationship with transcription in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 20115–20123 (2019). A. M. Ladouceur et al., Clusters of bacterial RNA polymerase are biomolecular condensates that assemble through liquid-liquid phase separation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 18540–18549 (2020). W. K. Cho et al., Mediator and RNA polymerase II clusters associate in transcription-dependent condensates. Science 361, 412–415 (2018).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Fanlong Meng, Zhi Qi, and Yiyang Ye for

useful discussions related to this work. The research was funded by the National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFF1200500) and supported by grants from Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences. We also acknowledge the partial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, under grant number 12272005. Author affiliations: a Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; b Department of Mechanics and Engineering Science, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; and c Center for Quantitative Biology, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

10. B. R. Sabari et al., Coactivator condensation at super-enhancers links phase separation and gene control. Science 361, eaar3958 (2018). 11. Y. E. Guo et al., Pol ii phosphorylation regulates a switch between transcriptional and splicing condensates. Nature 572, 543–548 (2019). 12. J. A. Morin et al., Sequence-dependent surface condensation of a pioneer transcription factor on DNA. Nat. Phys. 18, 271–276 (2022). 13. C. P. Brangwynne, T. J. Mitchison, A. A. Hyman, Active liquid-like behavior of nucleoli determines their size and shape in Xenopus laevis oocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 4334–4339 (2011). 14. A. A. Hyman, C. P. Brangwynne, Beyond stereospecificity: Liquids and mesoscale organization of cytoplasm. Dev. Cell 21, 14–16 (2011). 15. A. Patel et al., A liquid-to-solid phase transition of the ALS protein FUS accelerated by disease mutation. Cell 162, 1066–1077 (2015). 16. J. Berry, C. P. Brangwynne, M. Haataja, Physical principles of intracellular organization via active and passive phase transitions. Rep. Progress Phys. 81, 046601 (2018). 17. I. M. Lifshitz, V. V. Slyozov, The kinetics of precipitation from supersaturated solid solutions. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 19, 35–50 (1961). 18. C. Wagner, Theorie der alterung von niederschlägen durch umlösen (ostwald-reifung). Z. Elektrochem. Berichte Bunsengesell. physikalische Chem. 65, 581–591 (1961).

[Page 9]

35. D. S. Lee et al., Size distributions of intracellular condensates reflect competition between coalescence and nucleation. Nat. Phys. 19, 586–596 (2023). 36. J. E. Henninger et al., RNA-mediated feedback control of transcriptional condensates. Cell 184, 207–225 (2021). 37. A. J. Larsson et al., Genomic encoding of transcriptional burst kinetics. Nature 565, 251–254 (2019). 38. R. D. Phair, T. Misteli, High mobility of proteins in the mammalian cell nucleus. Nature 404, 604–609 (2000). 39. M. Doi, Soft Matter Physics (Oxford University Press, 2013). 40. Y. Shin et al., Spatiotemporal control of intracellular phase transitions using light-activated optodroplets. Cell 168, 159–171 (2017). 41. S. F. Shimobayashi, P. Ronceray, D. W. Sanders, M. P. Haataja, C. P. Brangwynne, Nucleation landscape of biomolecular condensates. Nature 599, 503–506 (2021). 42. H. Wang, F. M. Kelley, D. Milovanovic, B. S. Schuster, Z. Shi, Surface tension and viscosity of protein condensates quantified by micropipette aspiration. Biophys. Rep. 1 (2021). 43. A. G. Pyo, Y. Zhang, N. S. Wingreen, Proximity to criticality predicts surface properties of biomolecular condensates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2220014120 (2023). 44. J. A. Zimberlin, N. Sanabria-DeLong, G. N. Tew, A. J. Crosby, Cavitation rheology for soft materials. Soft Matter 3, 763–767 (2007). 45. R. Milo, R. Phillips, Cell Biology by the Numbers (Garland Science, 2015). 46. A. Sanchez, I. Golding, Genetic determinants and cellular constraints in noisy gene expression. Science 342, 1188–1193 (2013). 47. D. Nicolas, N. E. Phillips, F. Naef, What shapes eukaryotic transcriptional bursting? Mol. BioSyst. 13, 1280–1290 (2017). 48. E. Tunnacliffe, J. R. Chubb, What is a transcriptional burst? Trend. Genet. 36, 288–297 (2020). 49. D. Kondepudi, I. Prigogine, Modern Thermodynamics: From Heat Engines to Dissipative Structures (John Wiley & Sons, 2014). 50. L. Meng et al., Simulation codes of condensates with heterogeneous surrounding elasticity. GitHub. https://github.com/LingyuMeng99/Condensate-Surrounding-Elasticity/. Deposited 19 December 2023.

19. Y. Shin et al., Liquid nuclear condensates mechanically sense and restructure the genome. Cell 175, 1481–1491 (2018). 20. X. Wei, J. Zhou, Y. Wang, F. Meng, Modeling elastically mediated liquid-liquid phase separation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 268001 (2020). 21. M. Kothari, T. Cohen, Effect of elasticity on phase separation in heterogeneous systems. J. Mech. Phys. Solids 145, 104153 (2020). 22. Y. Zhang, D. S. W. Lee, Y. Meir, C. P. Brangwynne, N. S. Wingreen, Mechanical frustration of phase separation in the cell nucleus by chromatin. Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 258102 (2021). 23. D. S. Lee, N. S. Wingreen, C. P. Brangwynne, Chromatin mechanics dictates subdiffusion and coarsening dynamics of embedded condensates. Nat. Phys. 17, 531–538 (2021). 24. E. Vidal-Henriquez, D. Zwicker, Cavitation controls droplet sizes in elastic media. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2102014118 (2021). 25. P. Ronceray, S. Mao, A. Košmrlj, M. P. Haataja, Liquid demixing in elastic networks: Cavitation, permeation, or size selection? Europhys. Lett. 137, 67001 (2022). 26. M. Kothari, T. Cohen, The crucial role of elasticity in regulating liquid-liquid phase separation in cells. Biomech. Mod. Mechanobiol. 22, 645–654 (2022). 27. R. W. Style et al., Liquid-liquid phase separation in an elastic network. Phys. Rev. X 8, 011028 (2018). 28. K. A. Rosowski et al., Elastic ripening and inhibition of liquid-liquid phase separation. Nat. Phys. 16, 422–425 (2020). 29. D. Zwicker, R. Seyboldt, C. A. Weber, A. A. Hyman, F. Jülicher, Growth and division of active droplets provides a model for protocells. Nat. Phys. 13, 408–413 (2017). 30. C. Weber, D. Zwicker, F. Jülicher, C. Lee, Physics of active emulsions. Rep. Progress Phys. 82 (2019). 31. D. Zwicker, The intertwined physics of active chemical reactions and phase separation. Curr. Opin. Coll. Interface Sci. 61, 101606 (2022). 32. D. Zwicker, A. A. Hyman, F. Jülicher, Suppression of Ostwald ripening in active emulsions. Phys. Rev. E 92, 012317 (2015). 33. C. M. Caragine, S. C. Haley, A. Zidovska, Nucleolar dynamics and interactions with nucleoplasm in living cells. eLife 8, e47533 (2019). 34. J. Söding, D. Zwicker, S. Sohrabi-Jahromi, M. Boehning, J. Kirschbaum, Mechanisms for active regulation of biomolecular condensates. Trends Cell Biology 30, 4–14 (2020).
