[Page 1]

TorchMD-Net 2.0: Fast Neural Network Potentials for Molecular Simulations

arXiv:2402.17660v1 [cs.LG] 27 Feb 2024

Raul P. Pelaeza,† Guillem Simeona,† Raimondas Galvelis,†,‡ Antonio Mirarchi,† Peter Eastman,¶ Stefan Doerr,‡ Philipp Thölke,‡ Thomas E. Markland,¶ and Gianni De Fabritiis∗,†,‡,§ †Computational Science Laboratory, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), C Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. ‡Acellera Labs, C Dr Trueta 183, 08005, Barcelona, Spain ¶Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA §Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Passeig Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain E-mail: g.defabritiis@gmail.com

R.P.P. and G.S. contributed equally to this work.

Abstract

works. Additionally, the updated version introduces the capability to integrate physical priors, further enriching its application spectrum and utility in research. The software is available at https://github.com/torchmd/torchmd-net.

Achieving a balance between computational speed, prediction accuracy, and universal applicability in molecular simulations has been a persistent challenge. This paper presents substantial advancements in the TorchMD-Net software, a pivotal step forward in the shift from conventional force fields to neural networkbased potentials. The evolution of TorchMDNet into a more comprehensive and versatile framework is highlighted, incorporating cutting-edge architectures such as TensorNet. This transformation is achieved through a modular design approach, encouraging customized applications within the scientific community. The most notable enhancement is a significant improvement in computational efficiency, achieving a very remarkable acceleration in the computation of energy and forces for TensorNet models, with performance gains ranging from 2fold to 10-fold over previous iterations. Other enhancements include highly optimized neighbor search algorithms that support periodic boundary conditions and the smooth integration with existing molecular dynamics frame-

Introduction

Neural Network Potentials (NNPs) 1–7 are emerging as a key approach in molecular simulations, striving to optimize the balance between computational efficiency, predictive accuracy, and generality. Some software frameworks to facilitate the use of neural network potentials have been developed, such as SchNetPack, 8 TorchANI, 9 DeePMD-Kit, 10 and others. Among the first to appear, we released TorchMD-Net, initially designed for the Equivariant Transformer architecture 11 and a graph network, a simpler invariant graph neural network tailored for neural network potentials for protein coarsegraining. 12 Over time, TorchMD-Net has expanded its model architectures to include TensorNet, 13 an O(3)-equivariant message-passing

[Page 2]

neural network utilizing rank-2 Cartesian tensor representations which achieved state-of-theart accuracy on benchmark datasets. This evolution positions TorchMD-Net not just as a standalone tool, but as a versatile library for the development of NNPs. Efficiency has been at the forefront of recent enhancements to TorchMD-Net. Among the optimizations, CUDA graphs have been integrated, providing a performance boost especially for smaller workloads. TorchMD-Net has also incorporated the latest versions of its key dependencies (mainly PyTorch 14 and PyTorch Lightning 15 ), with a notable addition being the search for compatibility with the torch.compile submodule from PyTorch 2.0, a feature that compiles Just-In-Time (JIT) the modules into optimized kernels. While TorchMD-Net has introduced low precision modes (i.e. bfloat16) primarily as an exploratory tool for researchers, high precision (float64) is also available for ensuring detailed correctness checks during prototyping. The new technical enhancements include the introduction of periodic boundary conditions, a CUDA-optimized neighbor list, and memory-efficient dataset loaders. The inclusion of TorchMD-Net in the conda-forge 16 package repository and the release of the documentation 17 are steps taken to enhance its accessibility to researchers. Another feature is TorchMD-Net’s capacity to blend empirical physical knowledge into NNPs via priors. The integration of atom-wise and molecule-wise priors, such as the Ziegler-Biersack-Littmark 18 and Coulomb potentials, allows for a more nuanced approach in simulations. TorchMD-Net emphasizes compatibility with leading molecular dynamics (MD) packages, especially with OpenMM. 19 OpenMM, widely recognized in the computational chemistry field, can now interface directly with TorchMDNet through the OpenMM-Torch 20 plugin. This integration has been a collaborative effort, with OpenMM-Torch being co-developed by the core teams of both OpenMM and TorchMD-Net. This ensures streamlined and effective utilization of TorchMD-Net models within OpenMM’s simulation framework.

In the following sections we provide an overview of the TorchMD-Net framework. The manuscript is ordered as follows. In the Methods section we go over the currently available NNP architectures. We continue in section Training with details about the different parts involved in the training and deployment of these architectures and how they are exposed in TorchMD-Net. Then, in section Optimization, we lay out the optimization strategies employed in this release. Finally, we present a series of validation and performance results in the Results section. TorchMD-Net is freely available with a permissive licence (MIT) at https://github. com/torchmd/torchmd-net.

Methods

We interpret a neural network potential as a machine learning model that takes as input a series of atomic positions, denoted by R, embedding indices such as atomic numbers, Z, and optionally charges (which might be per-sample or per-atom), q, and outputs a per-sample scalar value and optionally its negative gradient with respect to the positions, typically interpreted as the potential energy and atomic forces, respectively. Note, however, that TorchMD-Net is not limited to this interpretation of the outputs, which are generally labelled as y and neg_dy respectively. Figure 1 provides a comprehensive overview of the TorchMD-Net architecture. The diagram’s left section illustrates the various components of the primary module, designated as TorchMD_Net, which constitutes, conceptually and in the API itself, a NNP model. Each component within this object is modular and customizable, allowing for the creation of diverse models. At the heart of the NNP is the representation_model. This part of the architecture takes the set of inputs stated above and outputs a series of per-atom features. These features are subsequently fed into an output_model. The purpose of this model is to further process these features into single atomic values, which typically will be aggre2

[Page 3]

Figure 1: The main module in TorchMD-Net is called TorchMD_Net from the torchmdnet.models.model module. This class combines a given representation model (such as the Equivariant Transformer), an output model (such as the scalar output module) and a prior model (such as the Atomref prior), producing a module that takes as input a series of atoms features and outputs a scalar value (i.e energy per molecule) and when derivative = True, its negative gradient with respect to the input positions (i.e atomic forces).

[Page 4]

gated and will represent the total potential energy, though it can represent other per-sample or per-atom quantities as well, depending on the specifics of its design and (optional) aggregation scheme. Output models normally include learnable parameters (e.g. a multilayer perceptron). Prior models can be employed to augment either the atom-level features or the aggregated per-molecule value with further physical insights. Furthermore, the framework integrates PyTorch’s Autograd for automatic differentiation, enabling the computation of the negative gradient of the per-molecule scalar prediction with respect to atomic positions. This is particularly relevant when interpreting the per-molecule value as the potential energy, as it yields the atomic forces in a way that ensures, by construction, that the resulting force field is energy conserving. This modular logic allows for flexibility in the combination of representation models and output models. Therefore, by building a custom output module, researchers can make use of the representation models for other prediction tasks beyond potential energy and forces.

New architecture: TensorNet

TensorNet 13 is an O(3)-equivariant model based on rank-2 Cartesian tensor representations. Euclidean neural network potentials 25–27 have been shown to achieve state-of-the-art performance and better data efficiency than previous models, relying on higher-rank equivariant features which are irreducible representations of the rotation group, in the form of spherical tensors. However, the computation of tensor products in these models can be computationally demanding. In contrast, TensorNet exploits the use of Cartesian rank-2 tensors (3x3 matrices) which can be very efficiently decomposed into scalar, vector and rank-2 tensor features. Furthermore, Clebsch-Gordan tensor products are substituted by straightforward and node-level 3x3 matrix products. Overall, these properties allow TensorNet to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on common benchmark datasets with a reduced number of message-passing steps, learnable parameters, and computational cost. The prediction of up to rank-2 molecular properties that behave appropriately under geometric transformations such as reflections and rotations is also possible.

Available representation models

Current models in TorchMD-Net at the time of writing are message-passing neural networks 21,22 (MPNNs) which learn approximations to the many-body potential energy function. Atoms are identified with graph nodes embedded in 3D space, building edges between them after the definition of some cutoff radius. The neural network uses atomic and geometric information to learn expressive representations by propagating, aggregating, and transforming features from neighboring nodes found within the cutoff radius. 23,24 In most current NNPs, after several message passing steps, node features are used to predict per-atom scalar quantities which are identified with atomic contributions to the energy of the molecule.

Equivariant Transformer

The Equivariant Transformer 11 (ET) is an equivariant neural network that uses both scalar and Cartesian vector representations. The distinctive feature of the ET in comparison to other Cartesian vector models such as PaiNN 28 or EGNN 29 is the use of a distancedependent dot product attention mechanism, which achieved state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets at the time of publication. Furthermore, the analysis of attention weights allowed us to extract insights into the interaction of different atomic species for the prediction of molecular energies and forces. The model also exhibits a low computational cost for inference and training in comparison to some of the most used NNPs in the literature. 30 As part of the current release, we removed a discontinuity at the cutoff radius. In the original description, vector features’ residual updates, as opposed to scalar features’ updates,

[Page 5]

received contributions from the value pathway of the attention mechanism which were not being properly weighted by the cosine cutoff function envelope, which is reflected in Eq. 9 in the original paper. 11 We fixed it by applying φ(dij ), i.e., split(Vj ⊙ Dij ) → split(φ(dij )Vj ⊙ Dij ). To ensure backward compatibility, this modification is only applied when setting the new ET argument vector_cutoff = True. The impact of this modification is evaluated in the results section.

in which case it is initialized with atomic reference energies, but these contributions are modified during training. • Coulomb: This prior corresponds to the usual Coulomb electrostatic interaction, scaled by a cosine switching function to reduce its effect at short distances. Using this prior requires providing per-atom partial charges. • D2 dispersion: In this case, the prior corresponds to the D2 dispersive correction used in DFT-D2. 35 C6 coefficients and Van der Waals radii for elements are already incorporated in the method.

Graph Network

The graph network is an invariant model inspired by both the SchNet 31 and PhysNet 32 architectures. The network was optimized to have satisfactory performance on coarse-grained proteins, allowing the building of NNPs that correctly reproduce fast-folder protein free energy landscapes. 12 In contrast to the ET and TensorNet, the graph network only uses relative distances between atoms as geometrical information, which are invariant to translations, rotations, and reflections. The distances are used by the model to learn a set of continuous filters that are applied to feature graph convolutions as in SchNet, 31 progressively updating the initial atomic embeddings by means of residual connections.

• ZBL potential: This prior implements the Ziegler-Biersack-Littmark (ZBL) potential for screened nuclear repulsion as described in Ref 18. It is an empirical potential effectively describing the repulsion between atoms at very short distances, and only atomic numbers need to be provided. Note that forces are computed directly by autograd when adding the energy contributions coming from the priors before the backward automatic differentiation step. Even though the previous terms are the currently predefined options in TorchMD-Net, all these priors are derived from a general BasePrior class, which easily allows researchers to implement their own priors, following the modular logic behind the framework.

Prior models

Priors are additional physical terms that can be introduced for the prediction of potential energies. Some of these terms have been used in NNPs in the literature, 33,34 sometimes even including learnable parameters. In TorchMDNet, we provide some predefined priors, which can be optionally added to the neural network prediction:

Training

The right diagram in Figure 1 depicts the main training loop in TorchMD-Net. A Dataset provides sample/output pairs for the NNP and is divided into training, validation and testing sets and batched by a Dataloader (as provided by the Pytorch Geometric library 36 ). We make use of the PyTorch Lightning library’s 15 trainer, which also allows multi-GPU training. Checkpoints are generated during training, containing the current weights of the model, which can then be subsequently loaded for inference or further training.

• Atomref: These are per-element atomic reference energies, which are usually provided directly in the dataset. In this case, the neural network has to predict the remaining contribution to the potential energy, which can be regarded as the formation energy of the molecule. There is also the option of making this prior learnable,

[Page 6]

Datasets

Within TorchMD-Net, datasets can be accessed through the YAML configuration file for use with the torchmd-train utility or programmatically via the Python API. Predefined datasets include SPICE, 37 QM9, 38 WaterBox, 39 (r)MD17 40 , 41 MD22, 42 ANI1, 43 ANI1x, 44 ANI1ccx, 44 ANI2x 45 and the COMP6 46 evaluation dataset with all its subsets (ANIMD, DrugBank, GDB07to09, GDB10to13, Tripeptides and S66X8), offering diverse training environments for molecular dynamics and quantum chemistry applications. These datasets serve as common benchmarks in the field of neural network potentials. However, on top of these, the framework allows the flexible incorporation of user-generated datasets for customized applications. The Custom dataset functionality allows users to train models with molecular data encapsulated in simple NumPy file formats without writing a single line of code. By specifying paths to coordinate and embedding index (e.g. atomic numbers) and reference energy and force files, researchers can easily integrate their datasets into the training process. This capability ensures TorchMD-Net’s 12 adaptability to a wider array of applications 34 beyond its pre-packaged offerings. In addition, 56 TorchMD-Net offers support for other popular 78 dataset formats, such as HDF5. Special care 109 is taken to ensure data is cached as much as 12 possible, using techniques such as in memory 14 datasets and memory mapped files.

Losses

During training, a weighted sum of mean squared error (MSE) losses of energy and forces is used, weighting each of them according to user input. In validation, we provide both L1 and MSE losses separately for energies and 31 forces, while for testing L1 losses alone are used. The framework allows to use an exponential moving average (EMA) to update the losses during the training and validation stages to smooth out progression of loss values.

Usage examples

In the following sections we showcase code for some typical usecases of TorchMD-Net. While these snippets are generally self-contained the reader is pointed to the online documentation 17 for further information.

Training code example

The project introduces a command line tool, torchmd-train, designed as a code-free method for model training. This tool is set up through a YAML file, with several examples available in the TorchMD-Net GitHub repository for reference. However, we also offer an illustrative script here that outlines the process of training an existing model using the Python API. The LNNP class, found within the torchmdnet.module module, encapsulates the procedures for both the creation and training of a model. This class is inherited from Pytorch Lightning LightningModule, offering all the extensive customization available in it. The following is a succinct yet comprehensive example of how to utilize LNNP for training purposes: from from from args

torchmdnet . data import DataModule torchmdnet . module import LNNP pyt orc h_l ig htn ing import Trainer = { ’ dataset ’: ’ ANI1X ’ , ’ model ’: ’ tensornet ’ , ’ num_epochs ’: 200 , ’ e m b e d d i n g _ d i me n s i o n ’: 128 , ’ num_layers ’: 2 , ’ num_rbf ’: 32 , ’ rbf_type ’: ’ expnorm ’ , ’ trainable_rbf ’: False , ’ activation ’: ’ silu ’ , ’ cutoff_lower ’: 0.0 , ’ cutoff_upper ’: 5.0 , ’ max_z ’: 100 , ’ max _nu m_ nei ghb ors ’: 64 , ’ derivative ’: True # So the model returns forces .

} data = DataModule ( args ) data . prepare_data () data . setup ( " fit " ) lnnp = LNNP ( args , prior_model = None , mean = data . mean , std = data . std ) trainer = Trainer ( max_epochs = args [ ’ num_epochs ’ ]) trainer . fit ( lnnp , data ) model = LNNP . l o a d _ f r o m _ c h e c k p o i n t ( trainer . c h e c k p o i nt _ c a l l b a c k . best_model_path ) trainer = pl . Trainer ( inference_mode = False ) trainer . test ( model , data )

This example shows the minimal steps required to prepare data, initialize the LNNP class, train and test a model using PyTorch Lightning’s Trainer. The Trainer here is simplified for brevity; in practice, additional callbacks and logger configurations could be added.

[Page 7]

Loading a Trained Model for In- 21 ference

energy = self . model ( z = self . embeddings , pos = positions ) [0] return energy * 96.4916 # eV -> kJ / mol

# The embeddings used during training ( e . g . atomic numbers ) # for each atom in the simulation . z = torch . tensor ([1 ,1] , torch . long ) model = torch . jit . script ( Wrapper (z , " model . ckpt " ) ) # Create a TorchForce object from the model torch_force = openmmtorch . TorchForce ( model ) system = System () # The TorchForce object can be used as a regular OpenMM Force system . addForce ( torch_force ) # Set up the rest of the OpenMM simulation # ...

After training a model, the next logical step is to use it for inference. TorchMD-Net offers a dedicated function, load_model, to facilitate this. Below is a concise example:

from torchmdnet . models . model import load_model # Define the path to the saved model checkpoint c heckpoint_path = " path / to / s a v e d _ m o d e l _ c h e c k p o i n t . ckpt " # Load the model loaded_model = load_model ( checkpoint_path ) # Prepare the input data ( atomic numbers , positions , batch index , etc .) # For demonstration , these are placeholders and should be replaced with actual data input_data = { ’z ’: torch . Tensor ([...]) , ’ pos ’: torch . Tensor ([...]) , ’ batch ’: torch . Tensor ([...]) # ... other optional fields } # Perform inference energy , forces = loaded_model (** input_data ) # Energy and forces are now available for further analysis or visualization

Typical neural network potential (NNP) algorithms implemented in PyTorch 14 comprise a series of sequential operations such as multilayer perceptrons and message passing operations. As PyTorch operations translate into highly optimized CUDA kernel calls, the efficiency of modern GPUs often turns kernel launching overhead into a performance bottleneck. CUDA graphs address this by consolidating multiple kernel calls into a single graph, drastically reducing kernel launch overhead. However, CUDA graphs impose stringent limitations. These include the need for static shapes in graphed code sections, which can lead to costly recompilations or memory inefficiencies, and the exclusion of operations requiring CPUGPU synchronization. Conversely, developments in the compiler community 47 , including technologies like OpenAI’s Triton 48 and subsequently PyTorch enhancements, are gradually diminishing the reliance on CUDA graphs by automatically changing the structure of the code in ever more profound ways (i.e kernel fusion 49–51 ). These advancements, such as TorchDynamo introduced in PyTorch 2.0 through torch.compile, optimize code structure through Just-In-Time (JIT) compilation. Even with JIT, and in general transpilationbased techniques, CUDA graphs often provide the best out-of-the-box performance improvements and at the bare minimum, facilitate the optimizations introduced by the former. Encapsulating a piece of code within a CUDA graph, a process known as ’stream capture’, necessitates adherence to several specific requirements. This often demands substantial mod-

In this example, checkpoint_path should point to the location where the trained model checkpoint is saved. The input_data dictionary should be populated with the actual atomic numbers, positions, and other required or optional fields. Finally, energy and forces are obtained from the loaded model and can be used as needed.

Integration with OpenMM

It is possible to run TorchMD-Net neural network potentials as force fields in OpenMM 19 to run molecular dynamics. The OpenMMTorch 20 package is leveraged for this. Integration consists of writing a wrapper class to accommodate for the unit requirements of OpenMM and to provide to the model any information not proper to OpenMM (like the embedding indices). The following code showcases an example on how to add a TorchMD-Net NNP as an OpenMM Force.

Optimization techniques

from torchmdnet . models . model import load_model from openmmtorch import TorchForce from openmm import System class Wrapper ( torch . nn . Module ) : def __init__ ( self , embeddings , model ) : super ( Wrapper , self ) . __init__ () self . embeddings = embeddings # OpenMM will compute the forces # by backpropagating the energy , # so we can load the model with derivative = False self . model = load_model ( model , derivative = False ) def forward ( self , positions ) : # OpenMM works with nanometer positions # and kilojoule per mole energies # Depending on the model , you might need # to convert the units positions = positions * 10.0 # nm -> A

[Page 8]

ifications to the code. Crucially, for code to be eligible for capture, it must avoid any CPUGPU synchronization activities, including synchronization barriers and memory copies. Additionally, all arrays involved in the operations must possess static shapes and fixed memory addresses, precluding any dynamic memory allocations during the process. The CUDA graph interface in PyTorch alleviates many challenges associated with adapting code for stream capture. It particularly excels in managing memory allocations within captured environments automatically and transparently. However, challenges arise in specific implementations, as exemplified by TensorNet. The main issue in TensorNet is its neighbor list, which inherently varies in shape at each inference step due to the fluctuating number of neighbors. This variation affects the early stages of the architecture, resulting in TensorNet primarily operating on dynamically shaped tensors. To address this, we implemented a static shape mode that creates placeholder neighbor pairs up to a predetermined maximum. We then ensure the architecture disregards these placeholders’ contributions. Although this method increases the initial workload, our empirical data indicates that the performance gains from capturing the entire network substantially outweigh this added overhead. In the following sections, we explore the impact of these optimizations on both inference and training performance.

Neighbor search and boundary conditions

better for large systems (see Figures 3 and 2). Effectively, this engine makes neighbor search a negligible part of the overall computation. Special measures are taken into account to ensure that the neighbor search is compatible with CUDA-graphs. For this matter, it is required that the neighbor search works on a statically-shaped set of input/outputs, which poses a problem given that the number of neighbor pairs in the system is not known in advance and is bound to change from input to input. We solve this by requiring an upper bound for the number of pairs in the system and padding the outputs with a special value (−1) for unused pairs. Furthermore, TorchMD-Net architectures support rectangular and triclinic periodic boundary conditions. Contrary to usual MD workloads, it is common to have batches of input samples in NNPs. This owns to the very nature of neural network training but also can benefit inference (for instance, allowing the possibility of running many simulations in parallel, like TorchMD 54 does). Our neighbor list is able to handle arbitrary batch sizes while maintaining compatibility with CUDA graphs. The current cell list implementation constructs a single cell list including atoms for all batches, excluding pairs of particles that pertain to different batches when finding neighbors in it. This makes it so that each particle has to perform a check against every other particle in the vicinity for all batches, which degrades performance with increasing batch size. We find this to be an acceptable compromise given that doing it this way facilitates compatibility with CUDA graphs and we assume that with increasing number of particles (where the cell list excels) the typical batch size will decrease. Still, the particularities of the cell list implementation makes its performance specially susceptible to the batch size, as evidenced by the variability observed in the cell list curves in figures 3 and 2. All data presented in this section was gathered in an RTX4090 NVIDIA GPU using CUDA 12. Each point is obtained by averaging 50 identical executions. Warmup executions are also performed before measuring.

periodic

Message-passing neural networks, such as the architectures currently supported in the framework, require a list of connections among nodes referred to as edges. This list is constructed by proximity after the definition of a cutoff radius (a neighbor list). TorchMD-Net offers a neighbor list construction engine specifically tailored for NNPs, exposing a naive brute-force O(N 2 ) algorithm that works best for small workloads and a cell list (a standard O(N ) hash-and-sort strategy widely used in MD 52,53 ) that performs

[Page 9]

Optimizing neural network training presents distinct challenges compared to inference optimization. Primarily, the variable length of each training sample, exacerbated by batching processes (where a varying number of samples constitute a single network input), impedes optimizations dependent on static shapes (i.e. CUDA graphs). A potential solution involves integrating ’ghost molecules’, akin to strategies used in static neighbor list shaping, to standardize the atom count inputted to the network. However, this method increases memory consumption in an already memoryconstrained environment and raises concerns about the backpropagation of losses for these non-existent atoms, which may lead to numerical instability. Moreover, training necessitates backpropagation through the network. In our context, this involves a double backpropagation process when the loss function includes force calculations. Currently, double backpropagation is inadequately supported by the PyTorch compiler. A workaround is to manually implement the network’s initial backward pass (specifically, the force computation). This adjustment enables Autograd to perform only a single backward pass during training, leveraging the PyTorch compiler’s capabilities. Nevertheless, challenges persist with the PyTorch compiler when managing dynamic input shapes. Given the current constraints, the current release does not include any training-specific optimizations besides the improved dataloader support as previously described.

Cell Brute force

Time (ms)

Batch Size

Figure 2: Performance comparison of cell (solid line) and brute-force (dashed line) neighbor search strategies across different batch sizes for a random cloud of 32k particles with 64 neighbors per particle on average. The particles are split into a certain number of batches.

Batch 1

Time (ms)

Batch 2 Batch 64

10−1

Number of particles

Training

Figure 3: Performance comparison of cell (solid line) and brute-force (dashed line) neighbor search strategies across different batch sizes for a random cloud of particles with 64 neighbors per particle on average. Cell list performance tends to degrade with increasing batch size, while the opposite is true for brute force.

Results

Validation

In this subsection, we evaluate the impact of the architectural modifications introduced in the models on predictive accuracy. In the case of TensorNet the modifications targeted its computational performance alone, while for the ET one needs to consider the changes induced by vector_cutoff = True.

[Page 10]

Accuracy with TensorNet

Original test MAE presented in Ref. 13 for the QM9 U0 target quantity is 3.9(1) meV, while the latest optimized versions of the model (see Figure 4) yield 3.8(2) meV, confirming that the architectural optimizations do not affect TensorNet’s prediction performance. The training loss was computed in this case as the MSE between predicted and true energies. This state-of-theart performance is achieved with the largest model with 4.0 million trainable parameters, with specific architectural and training hyperparameters being found in Table 5. We also provide in Table 1 the accuracy of smaller and shallower models on the same QM9 quantity (that is, using the same hyperparameters as in Table 5, except for embedding_dimension = 128 and num_layers = 0, 1, 2), while comparing them to other NNPs. Overall, TensorNet demonstrates very satisfactory performances, achieving close to state-of-the-art accuracy (< 5 meV MAE) with a very reduced number of parameters.

Table 1: Mean absolute error in meV for different models trained on QM9 target property U0 . TensorNet 3L* uses an embedding dimension of 256, while in other cases 128. For the ET, subscripts new and old correspond to the new and the original implementation, that is, with vector_cutoff = True and False, respectively. Model U0 MAE (meV) Cormorant SEGNN SchNet 57 EGNN Equiformer DimeNet++ 59 SphereNet ETold 11 PaiNN Allegro MACE 27 ETnew TensorNet 0L TensorNet 1L TensorNet 2L TensorNet 3L*

MSE Loss

10−2 10−3 10−4 10−5 10−6

Training Validation

Epoch

Figure 4: Training and validation curves for TensorNet on the QM9 U0 benchmark, hyperparameters are in Table 5.

Accuracy with the Equivariant Transformer

As previously mentioned, we provide an implementation of the ET where it is modified by applying the cutoff function to the values’

[Page 11]

dataset, 37 we selected the PubChem subset and utilized it to create a test set comprising four randomly chosen conformers. This test set aimed to evaluate the ability of the NNP to perform stable molecular dynamics (MD) simulations on molecules not encountered during the training stage. 61,62 The training dataset, as well as the PubChem subset, represent a broad diversification of molecules containing the elements H, C, N, O, S, F, Cl. To generate the input data, the SMILES and the coordinates of interest were used to build a molecule object using openff-toolkit, 63 and the atomic numbers were used as embeddings. Using the more accurate TensorNet 2L model, a 50 ns trajectory with a time-step of 1 fs was generated for each molecule using OpenMM’s 19 LangevinMiddleIntegrator at 298.5K and a friction coefficient of 1 ps−1 . We also used for one of the molecules a TensorNet 0L model with the same simulation settings to test its stability. A root mean square displacement (RMSD) analysis was performed for each trajectory taking the starting conformation as reference, see Figure 6. The results highlight the model’s ability to run stable MD simulations, even for the 0L case where the model’s receptive field and parameter count are substantially reduced.

pathway of the attention mechanism to enforce a continuous energy landscape at the cutoff distance. Therefore, we checked to which extent these changes, together with TorchMDNet’s ones, affect the accuracy of the Equivariant Transformer. We trained the model on the MD17 aspirin dataset (Figure 5) using the hyperparameters defined for the original version of the ET (Table 3, with the addition of vector_cutoff = True), giving final test MAEs of 0.139 kcal/mol and 0.232 kcal/mol/Åin energies and forces, respectively, compared to the original implementation which gave 0.123 kcal/mol and 0.253 kcal/mol/Å. 11 Regarding QM9 U0 , we reused the original hyperparameters for the dataset found in Table 4 (again, adding vector_cutoff = True), and comparative results can be found in Table 1.

MSE Loss

10−1 10−2

Training Validation Epoch

All results presented in this work were carried out using an NVIDIA RTX4090 GPU (driver version 525.147) with a 32 core Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4110 CPU in Ubuntu 20.04. We used CUDA 12.0 with Pytorch version 2.1.0 from conda-forge. We provide all timings in million steps per day, which can be easily converted to nanoseconds per day. These units are more commonly used in molecular dynamics settings, and the conversion can be done by taking the quantity in million steps per day times the timestep in femtoseconds. Therefore, for example, 1 million steps per day is equivalent to 1 ns/day for a timestep of 1 fs. To study the optimization strategies laid out in section 2.5 we show energy and forces inference performance for several equivalent implementations of TensorNet in Figure 7. Note

Figure 5: Training and validation curves for the new implementation of the Equivariant Transformer on the MD17 benchmark, hyperparameters are in Table 3.

Speed performance

Molecular Simulations

We performed NVT molecular dynamics simulations employing TensorNet models trained on the ANI-2x dataset. 45 A table detailing the hyperparameters is provided for reference in Table 6. Note that we did not include any physical priors in these trainings nor in the subsequent simulations, i.e all forces in the system come from the model itself. Starting from the SPICE

[Page 12]

A-2L

A-0L

B-2L

C-2L

D-2L

A: 135129529

B: 136963008

C: 160861289

D: 252660926

RMSD (Å)

20 25 30 Time (ns)

Figure 6: (Left) RMSD analysis for the trajectories of 4 molecules outside of the training set. Simulations are carried out with TensorNet 2L, using the parameters in table 6, with the exception of A-0L, in which a 0L TensorNet model is showcased. Presented data is plotted only every 1.28 ns for visualization clarity. (Right) Representation of the simulated molecules. Labels show the PubChem ID for each molecule. Table 2: TensorNet inference times in million steps per day for the "Plain" (P), "Compile" (C) and "Graph" (G) implementations and varying number of layers. Molecule (atoms) Alanine dipeptide (22) Testosterone (49) Chignolin (166) DHFR (2489) Factor IX (5807)

P 0L

P 1L P 2L 10.29 8.50 11.93 8.56 11.88 7.90

C 0L

that in TorchMD-Net, running inference requires one backpropagation step to compute forces as the negative gradient of the energies with respect to the input positions, which are computed via Autograd. This step is also included in these benchmarks. We make sure not to include any warmup times in these benchmarks by running the models for 100 iterations before timing. We refer as "Graph" to an implementation that has been modified to ensure every CUDA graph requirement is met. For "Compile" the implementation is carefully tailored to look for the best performance in torch.compile in addition to the changes introduced for "Graph". Finally, "Plain" repre-

C 1L

C 2L G 0L 21.23 172.80 21.49 154.29 21.39 77.14

G 1L

G 2L

sents the baseline implementation in PyTorch.

[Page 13]

Although in principle the code received by the compiler is entirely capturable by a graph, it often decides to capture only some sections of it, introducing other kinds of optimizations instead. This is also made evident by the appearance of the same kind of "plateau" performance for smaller workloads in both Plain and Compile, which can be attributed to a bottleneck produced by kernel launch overhead. Still, the torch compiler is able to provide a speedup of a factor 2 to 3 for all workloads with respect to the original implementation. CUDA kernel overhead (and thus the performance gain of CUDA graphs) is expected to dominate for small workloads, where it is usual for the kernel launching time to be larger than the actual execution. Figure 7 indeed corroborates this by showing speedups between 10 and 2 times for molecules with up to a few hundreds of atoms and for all numbers of interaction layers (0, 1 and 2). Starting from workloads consisting of several hundreds of atoms, the performance of the Plain version is recovered. We also explore inference times for some molecules with varying number of atoms in Table 2. For these molecules, which can be found in the repository for speed benchmarking purposes, we measure time to compute the potential energy and atomic forces of a single example using TensorNet with 0, 1 and 2 interaction layers. Again, we express this time in million steps per day. In all cases we use a cutoff of 4.5Å, an embedding dimension of 128, 32 radial basis functions and a maximum of 32 neighbors per particle.

Million steps per day

0L

Plain Compile Graphs

Million steps per day

1L

Plain Compile Graphs

2L Million steps per day

Plain Compile Graphs

Number of particles

Figure 7: Comparison between TensorNet inference times (energy and forces) with 0, 1 and 2 layers, embedding dimension 128, 64 neighbors on average. All atoms are passed in a single batch. Plain represents the bare TensorNet implementation; with Compile the module has been preprocessed with torch.compile with the "max-autotune" option; for Graphs the whole computation has been captured into a single CUDA graph.

Conclusions

TorchMD-Net has significantly evolved in its recent iterations, becoming a comprehensive platform for neural network potentials (NNPs). It provides researchers with robust tools for both rapid prototyping of new models and executing production-level tasks. However, despite these advancements, NNPs still face substantial challenges before they can fully replace traditional force fields in molecular dynamics simulations. Currently, while the necessary software infras13

[Page 14]

tructure is largely in place, as evidenced by the first-class support for NNPs in popular packages, 19 issues such as memory requirements and computational performance remain significant concerns. The impact of memory limitations is anticipated to diminish with ongoing hardware advancements. Yet, enhancing computational performance to a level that is competitive with traditional methods necessitates more intricate strategies. This involves developing architectures and their implementations in a manner that leverages the full capabilities of GPU hardware. From a software development perspective, the compilation functionality within PyTorch is an evolving feature, still in its early stages. Its current development trajectory, which aims to minimize the necessary code modifications for effective utilization, suggests that future PyTorch releases will likely bring performance enhancements. Continuous improvements in the relevant toolset, encompassing PyTorch, CUDA, Triton, and others, are gradually narrowing the performance gap between highly optimized code and more straightforward implementations.

National Institutes of Health.

References (1) Behler, J.; Parrinello, M. Generalized Neural-Network Representation of HighDimensional Potential-Energy Surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 146401. (2) Kocer, E.; Ko, T. W.; Behler, J. Neural Network Potentials: A Concise Overview of Methods. 2021. (3) Behler, J. Perspective: Machine learning potentials for atomistic simulations. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2016, 145, (4) Schütt, K. T.; Sauceda, H. E.; Kindermans, P.-J.; Tkatchenko, A.; Müller, K.R. SchNet – A deep learning architecture for molecules and materials. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2018, 148, 241722. (5) Deringer, V. L.; Caro, M. A.; Csányi, G. Machine Learning Interatomic Potentials as Emerging Tools for Materials Science. Advanced Materials 2019, 31, 1902765. (6) Botu, V.; Batra, R.; Chapman, J.; Ramprasad, R. Machine Learning Force Fields: Construction, Validation, and Outlook. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2017, 121, 511–522.

Acknowledgement We thank Prof. Jan Rezac for discovering the spurious discontinuity in the Equivariant Transformer. G. S. is financially supported by Generalitat de Catalunya’s Agency for Management of University and Research Grants (AGAUR) PhD grant FI-2-00587. This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 823712; and the project PID2020-116564GBI00 has been funded by MCIN / AEI / 10.13039/501100011033; Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) of the National Institutes of Health under award number R01GM140090. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the

(7) Ko, T. W.; Finkler, J. A.; Goedecker, S.; Behler, J. A fourth-generation highdimensional neural network potential with accurate electrostatics including non-local charge transfer. Nature Communications 2021, 12, 398. (8) Schütt, K. T.; Hessmann, S. S. P.; Gebauer, N. W. A.; Lederer, J.; Gastegger, M. SchNetPack 2.0: neural network toolbox for atomistic machine learning. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2023, 158 . (9) Gao, X.; Ramezanghorbani, F.; Isayev, O.; Smith, J. S.; Roitberg, A. E. TorchANI:

[Page 15]

A Free and Open Source PyTorch-Based Deep Learning Implementation of the ANI Neural Network Potentials. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 2020, 60, 3408–3415.

(19) Eastman, P. et al. OpenMM 8: Molecular Dynamics Simulation with Machine Learning Potentials. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 2024, 128, 109–116, PMID: 38154096.

(10) Zeng, J. et al. DeePMD-kit v2: A software package for deep potential models. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2023,

(20) OpenMM-Torch. https://github.com/ openmm/openmm-torch. (21) Bronstein, M. M.; Bruna, J.; Cohen, T.; Veličković, P. Geometric Deep Learning: Grids, Groups, Graphs, Geodesics, and Gauges. 2021; https://arxiv.org/abs/

(11) Thölke, P.; Fabritiis, G. D. Equivariant Transformers for Neural Network based Molecular Potentials. International Conference on Learning Representations.

(22) Gilmer, J.; Schoenholz, S. S.; Riley, P. F.; Vinyals, O.; Dahl, G. E. Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry. 2017; https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.01212.

(12) Majewski, M.; Pérez, A.; Thölke, P.; Doerr, S.; Charron, N. E.; Giorgino, T.; Husic, B. E.; Clementi, C.; Noé, F.; Fabritiis, G. D. Machine Learning CoarseGrained Potentials of Protein Thermodynamics. 2022.

(23) Joshi, C. K.; Bodnar, C.; Mathis, S. V.; Cohen, T.; Liò, P. On the Expressive Power of Geometric Graph Neural Networks. 2023; https://arxiv.org/abs/

(13) Simeon, G.; Fabritiis, G. D. TensorNet: Cartesian Tensor Representations for Efficient Learning of Molecular Potentials. Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2023.

(24) Duval, A.; Mathis, S. V.; Joshi, C. K.; Schmidt, V.; Miret, S.; Malliaros, F. D.; Cohen, T.; Lio, P.; Bengio, Y.; Bronstein, M. A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Geometric GNNs for 3D Atomic Systems. 2023; https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07511.

(14) Paszke, A. et al. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 ; Curran Associates, Inc., 2019; pp 8024–8035.

(25) Batzner, S.; Musaelian, A.; Sun, L.; Geiger, M.; Mailoa, J. P.; Kornbluth, M.; Molinari, N.; Smidt, T. E.; Kozinsky, B. E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nature Communications 2022,

(15) https://lightning.ai/ pytorch-lightning. (16) conda-forge community The conda-forge Project: Community-based Software Distribution Built on the conda Package Format and Ecosystem. 2015; https://doi. org/10.5281/zenodo.4774216.

(26) Musaelian, A.; Batzner, S.; Johansson, A.; Sun, L.; Owen, C. J.; Kornbluth, M.; Kozinsky, B. Learning local equivariant representations for large-scale atomistic dynamics. Nature Communications 2023,

(17) TorchMD-NET Documentation. https://torchmdnet.readthedocs.io/en/latest/, Accessed: 2024-02-13. (18) Biersack, J. P.; Ziegler, J. F. Ion Implantation Techniques; Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1982; p 122–156.

(27) Batatia, I.; Kovacs, D. P.; Simm, G. N. C.; Ortner, C.; Csanyi, G. MACE: Higher Order Equivariant Message Passing Neural Networks for Fast and Accurate Force

[Page 16]

Fields. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2022.

of Computational Chemistry 2006, 27, 1787–1799.

(28) Schütt, K. T.; Unke, O. T.; Gastegger, M. Equivariant message passing for the prediction of tensorial properties and molecular spectra. 2021; https://arxiv.org/ abs/2102.03150.

(36) Fey, M.; Lenssen, J. E. Fast Graph Representation Learning with PyTorch Geometric. CoRR 2019, abs/1903.02428 . (37) Eastman, P.; Behara, P. K.; Dotson, D. L.; Galvelis, R.; Herr, J. E.; Horton, J. T.; Mao, Y.; Chodera, J. D.; Pritchard, B. P.; Wang, Y.; Fabritiis, G. D.; Markland, T. E. SPICE, A Dataset of Drug-like Molecules and Peptides for Training Machine Learning Potentials. Scientific Data 2023, 10 .

(29) Satorras, V. G.; Hoogeboom, E.; Welling, M. E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural Networks. https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.09844. (30) Bihani, V.; Pratiush, U.; Mannan, S.; Du, T.; Chen, Z.; Miret, S.; Micoulaut, M.; Smedskjaer, M. M.; Ranu, S.; Krishnan, N. M. A. EGraFFBench: Evaluation of Equivariant Graph Neural Network Force Fields for Atomistic Simulations. 2023; https://arxiv.org/abs/

(38) Ramakrishnan, R.; Dral, P. O.; Rupp, M.; von Lilienfeld, O. A. Quantum chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Scientific Data 2014, 1 . (39) Cheng, B.; Engel, E. A.; Behler, J.; Dellago, C.; Ceriotti, M. Ab initio thermodynamics of liquid and solid water. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2019, 116, 1110–1115.

(31) Schütt, K. T.; Arbabzadah, F.; Chmiela, S.; Müller, K. R.; Tkatchenko, A. Quantum-chemical insights from deep tensor neural networks. Nature Communications 2017, 8,

(40) Chmiela, S.; Tkatchenko, A.; Sauceda, H. E.; Poltavsky, I.; Schütt, K. T.; Müller, K.-R. Machine learning of accurate energy-conserving molecular force fields. Science Advances 2017, 3 .

(32) Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. PhysNet: A Neural Network for Predicting Energies, Forces, Dipole Moments, and Partial Charges. J Chem Theory Comput 2019, 15, 3678–3693.

(41) https://figshare.com/articles/ dataset/Revised_MD17_dataset_ rMD17_/12672038.

(33) Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. PhysNet: A Neural Network for Predicting Energies, Forces, Dipole Moments, and Partial Charges. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2019, 15, 3678–3693.

(42) Chmiela, S.; Vassilev-Galindo, V.; Unke, O. T.; Kabylda, A.; Sauceda, H. E.; Tkatchenko, A.; Müller, K.-R. Accurate global machine learning force fields for molecules with hundreds of atoms. Science Advances 2023, 9 .

(34) Unke, O. T.; Chmiela, S.; Gastegger, M.; Schütt, K. T.; Sauceda, H. E.; Müller, K.R. SpookyNet: Learning force fields with electronic degrees of freedom and nonlocal effects. Nature Communications 2021,

(43) Smith, J. S.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. ANI-1: an extensible neural network potential with DFT accuracy at force field computational cost. Chemical Science 2017, 8, 3192–3203.

(35) Grimme, S. Semiempirical GGA-type density functional constructed with a long-range dispersion correction. Journal

[Page 17]

(44) Smith, J. S.; Zubatyuk, R.; Nebgen, B.; Lubbers, N.; Barros, K.; Roitberg, A. E.; Isayev, O.; Tretiak, S. The ANI-1ccx and ANI-1x data sets, coupled-cluster and density functional theory properties for molecules. Scientific Data 2020, 7 .

(51) Filipovič, J.; Madzin, M.; Fousek, J.; Matyska, L. Optimizing CUDA code by kernel fusion: application on BLAS. The Journal of Supercomputing 2015, 71, 3934–3957. (52) Nguyen, H.; Corporation, N. GPU Gems 3 ; Lab Companion Series v. 3; AddisonWesley, 2008.

(45) Devereux, C.; Smith, J. S.; Huddleston, K. K.; Barros, K.; Zubatyuk, R.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. Extending the Applicability of the ANI Deep Learning Molecular Potential to Sulfur and Halogens. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2020, 16, 4192–4202, PMID: 32543858.

(53) Tang, Y.-H.; Karniadakis, G. E. Accelerating dissipative particle dynamics simulations on GPUs: Algorithms, numerics and applications. Computer Physics Communications 2014, 185, 2809–2822. (54) Doerr, S.; Majewski, M.; Pérez, A.; Krämer, A.; Clementi, C.; Noe, F.; Giorgino, T.; Fabritiis, G. D. TorchMD: A Deep Learning Framework for Molecular Simulations. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2021, 17, 2355–2363.

(46) Smith, J. S.; Nebgen, B.; Lubbers, N.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. Less is more: Sampling chemical space with active learning. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2018, 148, 241733. (47) Jia, Z.; Padon, O.; Thomas, J.; Warszawski, T.; Zaharia, M.; Aiken, A. TASO: Optimizing Deep Learning Computation with Automatic Generation of Graph Substitutions. Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles. New York, NY, USA, 2019; p 47–62.

(55) Anderson, B.; Hy, T.-S.; Kondor, R. Cormorant: Covariant Molecular Neural Networks. Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. Red Hook, NY, USA, (56) Brandstetter, J.; Hesselink, R.; van der Pol, E.; Bekkers, E. J.; Welling, M. Geometric and Physical Quantities Improve E(3) Equivariant Message Passing. 2021; https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.02905.

(48) Tillet, P.; Kung, H. T.; Cox, D. Triton: An Intermediate Language and Compiler for Tiled Neural Network Computations. Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages (MAPL 2019). Phoenix, Arizona, United States,

(57) Schütt, K. T.; Sauceda, H. E.; Kindermans, P.-J.; Tkatchenko, A.; Müller, K.R. SchNet – A deep learning architecture for molecules and materials. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2018, 148, 241722.

(49) Appleyard, J.; Kociský, T.; Blunsom, P. Optimizing Performance of Recurrent Neural Networks on GPUs. CoRR 2016, abs/1604.01946 .

(58) Liao, Y.-L.; Smidt, T. Equiformer: Equivariant Graph Attention Transformer for 3D Atomistic Graphs. The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations. 2023.

(50) Wang, G.; Lin, Y.; Yi, W. Kernel fusion: An effective method for better power efficiency on multithreaded GPU. 2010 IEEE/ACM Int’l Conference on Green Computing and Communications & Int’l Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social Computing. 2010; pp 344–350.

(59) Gasteiger, J.; Giri, S.; Margraf, J. T.; Günnemann, S. Fast and UncertaintyAware Directional Message Passing for

[Page 18]

Non-Equilibrium Molecules. 2020; https: //arxiv.org/abs/2011.14115.

Hyperparameters

In the pursuit of transparency and reproducibility, this appendix provides a detailed account of the hyperparameters employed in our computational experiments. The tables contained herein present the specific values and settings used to achieve the results discussed in the main body of this paper. Readers and fellow researchers are encouraged to refer to these tables when attempting to replicate our results or when utilizing the torchmd-train utility for their own training purposes.

(60) Liu, Y.; Wang, L.; Liu, M.; Zhang, X.; Oztekin, B.; Ji, S. Spherical Message Passing for 3D Graph Networks. 2021; https: //arxiv.org/abs/2102.05013. (61) Fu, X.; Wu, Z.; Wang, W.; Xie, T.; Keten, S.; Gomez-Bombarelli, R.; Jaakkola, T. S. Forces are not Enough: Benchmark and Critical Evaluation for Machine Learning Force Fields with Molecular Simulations. Transactions on Machine Learning Research 2023, Survey Certification.

Table 3: MD17 hyperparameters used for the ET training in Figure 5.

(62) Vita, J. A.; Schwalbe-Koda, D. Data efficiency and extrapolation trends in neural network interatomic potentials. Machine Learning: Science and Technology 2023, 4, 035031.

Parameter activation attn_activation batch_size cutoff_lower cutoff_upper derivative distance_influence early_stopping_patience ema_alpha_neg_dy ema_alpha_y embedding_dimension lr lr_factor lr_min lr_patience lr_warmup_steps neg_dy_weight num_heads num_layers num_rbf seed train_size val_size vector_cutoff y_weight

(63) Wagner, J. et al. openforcefield/openfftoolkit: 0.14.5 Minor feature release. https://doi.org/10.5281/ zenodo.10103216.

Value silu silu True both 1e-3 1e-7 True

[Page 19]

Table 4: QM9 U0 hyperparameters used to obtain the results for ETnew in Table 1. Parameter activation attn_activation batch_size cutoff_lower cutoff_upper derivative distance_influence early_stopping_patience ema_alpha_neg_dy ema_alpha_y embedding_dimension lr lr_factor lr_min lr_patience lr_warmup_steps neg_dy_weight num_heads num_layers num_rbf remove_ref_energy seed train_size val_size vector_cutoff y_weight

Table 5: QM9 U0 hyperparameters used for the trainings in Figure 4 to obtain the results for TensorNet 3L* in Table 1.

Value silu silu False both 4e-4 1e-7 true True

Parameter Value activation silu batch_size cutoff_lower cutoff_upper derivative False early_stopping_patience embedding_dimension equivariance_invariance_group O(3) gradient_clipping lr 1e-4 lr_factor lr_min 1e-7 lr_patience lr_warmup_steps neg_dy_weight num_layers num_rbf remove_ref_energy true seed train_size val_size y_weight

[Page 20]

Table 6: ANI2x hyperparameters used for TensorNet training. The model was then used to run the stable molecular dynamics simulations in Figure 6. Parameter activation batch_size cutoff_lower cutoff_upper derivative early_stopping_patience embedding_dimension equivariance_invariance_group gradient_clipping lr lr_factor lr_min lr_patience lr_warmup_steps neg_dy_weight num_layers num_rbf seed train_size val_size y_weight

Value silu True O(3) 1e-3 1e-7 {0,2}
