[Page 1]

J. Mol. Biol. (1994) 236, 1369-1381

Principles Determining the Structure of B-Sheet Barrels in Proteins I. A Theoretical Alexey G. Murzin’*‘t,

Analysis

Arthur M. Lesk’ and Cyrus Chothia1$2

‘M RC Laboratory of Molecular Biology 2Cambridge Cen tre for Protein Engineering and 3Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge Clinical Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, U.K.

School

The major feature of many proteins is a large p-sheet that twists and coils to form a closed structure in which the first strand is hydrogen bonded to the last: the P-sheet barrel. McLachlan classified barrels in terms of two integral parameters: the number of strands in the P-sheet, n, and the “shear number”, S, a measure of the stagger of the strands in the P-sheet. He showed that the mean radius of a barrel and the extent to which strands are tilted relative to its axis are determined by the values of R and S. Here we show that the (n, S) values determine all the other general structural features of regular P-sheet barrels, in particular, optimal values of the twist and coiling angles that produce the closed P-sheet, the hyperboloidal shape and the arrangement of residues in the barrel interior. Consideration of the residue arrangements in the interiors of different potential barrel structures, and of side-chain volumes, suggest that barrels, in which the interiors are close packed by the residues in p-sheets with good geometries, have structures that correspond to one of only ten different combinations of n and S. In the accompanying paper, we demonstrate, by an analysis of all observed protein structures that contain P-sheet barrels and for which atomic co-ordinates are available, the validity of these theoretical results. Keywords:

classification

of folds; protein architecture; b-sheet structure; structural repertoires

1. Introduction Proteins form structures in which the residues are in low energy conformations and the P-sheets and a-helices close pack to form a dense interior. Conformational energetics strongly favours p-sheets with a right-handed twist, but they have an intrinsic flexibility that means the extent of their twist (and coiling) can vary greatly (Chothia, 1973, 1983; Nishikawa & Scheraga, 1976; Salemme L 1981a,b; Chou et al., Weatherford, Sowdhamini et al., 1992). This allows two main types of structures to be formed by the association of P-sheets. In one, twisted b-sheets pack face to face (aligned packing) to form sandwich or propeller structures (Chothia et al., 1977; Cohen et al., 1981; Chothia & Janin, 1981; Finkelstein & Ptitsyn, 1987; t On leave from the Institute of Mathematical Problems of Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 142292 Pushchino, Moscow Region, Russia. 0022-2836/94/lOl369-13

SO8.00/0

residue packing;

Chothia & Finkelstein 1990; Munin, 1992). In the other, j-sheets twist and coil to form closed barrel structures in which their first strand is hydrogen bonded to the last. Since the first accurate descriptions of P-sheet barrels (Birktoft & Blow, 1972) a number of papers have been published on the principles that govern their structure (McLachlan, 1979; Weatherford, Richardson, 1981; Salemme 1981a,b; Salemme, 1981; Chothia C Janin, 1982; Novotny et al., 1984; Lasters et al., 1988, 1990; Lesk et al., 1989; Lasters, 1990; Ke, 1992; Murzin et al., 1992). Though these papers have described much of interest and importance, there has not been so far, in our view, a set of coherent principles that describe and relate all, or most, of the main features of barrel structures. In this paper we derive such a set of principles. We analyse first the relationships between the main geometrical features of barrel structures; second the extent p-sheets need to twist and coil to form closed structures, and third the residue 0 1994 Academic Press Limited

[Page 2]

.I370

Theory of j-Sheet Barrels

packing in barrel interiors. On the basis of these analyses we argue that there are a very limited set of defined architectures for b-sheet barrels in proteins. In the accompan$ng paper (Murzin et al., 1994) we demonstrate the validity of these principles by an analysis of all observed protein struc.tures that contain p-sheet barrels and for which atomic co-ordinates are available.

2. Terms Used to Describe the ‘Structure of gSheet Barrels A schematic drawing of a regular barrel, in which all the strands in the p-sheet are equivalent and the cross-section is circular, is show9 in Figure 1. Its main features are the following: * n, the number of strands in the P-sheet; S, the shear number. This is a measure of the extent to which the /l-she& is staggered. S can be determined in the following manner. Starting from residue k in strand 1, move around the barrel in a direction perpendicular to the direction of the strands until strand 1 is reached again. Because of the stagger the point of return will not be residue k but one displaced from it, residue 1 (see Figure l(b)). The shear number is Il-kl. Note that along a strand consecutive residues alternate between the two sides of the /?-sheet but, in the direction perpendicular to the strands, adjacent residues are on the same side; this means that S must be an even integer. The mean slope of the strands to the axis of the barrel (Figure 1); the mean radius of the barrel; the c” to c” distance along the strands; the interstrand distance; the mean twist of the j-sheet about an axis parallel to the strand direction; the mean twist of the P-sheet about an axis perpendicular to the strand direction. It is related to the twist angle, 8, by the equation T = (a/b)& the mean coiling of the b-sheet along the strands; and the mean coiling of the P-sheet along a line perpendicular to the strands. More detailed definitions of 8, t, E and q are given in section 4. In the next section we describe the relation between n, S, a, R, a and b in regular barrels. In the following section we describe their relation to 8, r, E and u.

McLachlan

(1979) showed that: tan a = Salnb

R = b/[2 sin(a/n)cos a]

(see Figure 1). Using equation (1) we can substitute in equation (2) to obtain the following expression: R = [(Sa)2 + (nb)2]1’2/[2n sin(a/n)].

a, the C” to C” distance along the strands, and b, the interstrand distance, can be taken as constants: 33 A and 44 A, respectively (Lesk et al., 1989). This means that a, the mean slope of the strands to the axis of the barrel, and R, the mean radius of the barrel, are dependent only upon n, the number of strands in the P-sheet, and S, its shear number. For large n, n sin(+) + K and R + R,, where: R, = [(SU)~ + (n6)2]1’2/2x.

R. combines n and S in a symmetrical manner that is useful in the theoretical analysis described below. The quantity [(Sa)2+ (nb)2]1’2 (=2nR,,) is an approximation of the circumference of the equatorial cross-section. For n 2 4, the values of R, are only a little (10% or less) smaller than the R values given by equation (3).

4. The Twist and Coiling of B-Sheets in Regular Barrels (a)

A co-ordinate system for @beets

The main-chains of P-sheets in proteins form twodimensional surfaces which are rarely even approximately planar. The shape of the surface of a P-sheet, depends upon the conformation of its individual strands and the geometrical relationships between adjacent strands. To describe these features it, is useful to define a local co-ordinate system. Residues in a b-sheet are connected by covalent bonds along the strand direction and by lateral hydrogen bonding in a direction perpendicular to the strand direction. This suggests a natural local co-ordinate system based on a C-direction (along the strands; that is, in the direction of the covalent bonding) and an H-direction (along a line joining residues in the mean direction of the hydrogen bonding) (Figure 1). In this co-ordinate system the residues are distributed on a locally approximate rectangular lattice with cell parameters a (in the C-direction) and b (in the H-direction). Ideal parallel and antiparallel p-sheets have slightly different cell parameters but the differences are small compared with the variation in observed values. We use, for P-sheets of both types, a = 3.3 A and b = 44 ii (Lesk et al., 1989; Murzin et al., 1992). (b) The twist of P-sheets

3. The Relations between Strand Number, Shear Number, Strand Tilt and Barrel Radius A schematic drawing of a regular barrel structure is shown in Figure 1 and the nomenclature for its main features was given in the last section.

The twist of a P-sheet involves both the conformation of individual strands and the relative orientations of adjacent strands. These are jointly constrained by the requirements of hydrogen bonding.

[Page 3]

of P-Sheet Barrels

Theory

b)

barrel axis C-direction

n(=6)

H-direction

Figure 1. Illustrations of the parameters used to define b-sheet barrels. (a) Schematic drawing of a regular P-barrel. Strands are shown as thick lines, residues that point into the interior as small closed circles, residues that point out as large open circles and hydrogen bonds as broken lines. Only part of the P-sheet is shown: just 3 strands. On this drawing we indicate the barrel radius, R; the tilt of the st,rands to the barrel axis, a: the C” to c” distance along the strands, a, and the interstrand distance. 6. (Parts (a) ancl (b) of this Figure illustrate the case of a p-sheet with all adjacent strands antiparallel. N0t.e that the definitions of parameters used to define P-barrels are independent of whether strands are parallel or antiparallel.) (b) A plan of the /?-sheet in a barrel produced by cut.ting along strand 1 and unrolling the B-sheet on a flat surface. The first strand is shown twice to illustrate how its hydrogen bonding to the second and last strands closes the barrel structure. On the plan we indicate the number of strands. n (in this example n = 6). In the discussion of B-sheet geometry. we define a C-dire&on along the strands and, perpendicular to it, an H-direction (see section 4(a)). The extent of the stagger of the /?-sheet is given by the shear number. S. S can be determined by starting from residue k in strand I, move around t,he barrel, in a direction perpendicular to the direction of the strand, until strand 1 is reached again. Because of the stagger the point of return will not be residue k but one displaced from it, 1 . The shear number is I/-k1 (in this example S = 8). Note that along a strand consecutive residues alternate in the direction of their hydrogen bonding: this means that S must be an even integer. (c) The definition of the twist and coiling angles of the P-sheet. We show a small section of the P-sheet: residues. D. E. F in strand 1, N. 0, P in strand 2 and X. Y, Z in strand 3. The small open circles represent the positions of these residues when projected onto the surface of the barrel. If the vectors defined by the relative positions of residues e.g. N and 0 are written in the form NO, then the twist and coiling angles of the P-sheet can be defined by 4 angles: 8. the mean twist of the P-sheet about an axis perpendicular to the strand direction: 0 = arccos[(DE. NO)/(IDEIINOI)]; T, the mean twist of the P-sheet about an axis parallel to the strand direction: T = arccos[(DN-EO)/(IDNIIEOI)]; (T is related to the twist angle 0 by the equation T = (a/b)e.) E. the mean coiling of the b-sheet along the strands: E = arccos[(NO. OP)/(lNOllOPI)], and q, the mean coiling of the P-sheet along a line perpendicular to the strands. q = arccos[(EO.OY)/(IEOIIOYI)].

[Page 4]

Theory

of P-Sheet Barrels

A& section of polypeptide chain in which all residues have the same conformation will have the form of a generalized helix with n, residues per turn. The quantity n, is related to the main-chain torsion angles, 4, $, by the equation: cos[x(n,+

1)/n,] = -0.817

sin[(r$+$)/2] +9045 cos[(4-$)/2]

(Sche’llman Q Schellman, 1964). The combinations of 4, II/ angles that correspond to constant values of n, fall on curv&s in the Ramachandran diagram. In a b-sheet with no twist and straight strands the number of residues per turn, nr, is exactly 2. Within the p-region, the curve nL, = 2 corresponds approximately to the main diagonal, 4+$ = 0, of the Ramachandran diagram. /?-Strands with 4 + $ > 0 have positive (right-handed) twists when viewed along the strand direction and /?-strands with 4+* < 0 have negative (left-handed) twists. Most of the /?-region lies above the diagonal and has 4 + 9 > 0. This gives p-sheets the right-handed twist observed in proteins (Chothia, 1973). In terms of the co-ordinate system defined in the previous section, the twist of a P-sheet about the C and H-directions can be described by the parameters: 8, the mean angle between the local directions of two adjacent strands. The angle typically has values of - -20” but the allowed values of 4 and t,Gin the /I-region of the Ramachandran diagram are consistent with values between -50” and + 10”; T, the corresponding mean angle between the local directions of adjacent H-lines. By definition the twist angles 8 and r are dihedral angles measured between - 180” and + 180”. They are related by the equation T = -(a/6)8. In practice, we need only absolute values and can ignore in the following sections the sign of the angles.

(c) The coiling of /?-sheets If the strands in a p-sheet are strongly twisted and straight they quickly splay apart. If they are to maintain their hydrogen bonds the twisted strands must be also coiled (Nishikawa & Scheraga, 1976; Salemme 6 Weatherford, 1981a,b), as is shown in Figure 2. In terms of our co-ordinate system the extent of the coiling of a b-sheet in the C and H-directions can be described by the parameters: the mean angle by which the local direction of C-lines (i.e. strands) change from one residue to the next; and the mean angle by which the local direction of H-lines change on going from one strand to the next. Regular coiling along strands (in the C-direction) is usually produced by residues having alternating conformations in which the mean values of $ - 4 for odd and even residues are different. Maintaining

Figure 2. Two orthogonal views of a P-stranded B-sheet which is strongly

proper hydrogen P-strands further tii

z-4i+l7

twisted and coiled.

bonding between regularly restricts the range to: +i+l ti i+Z

coiled

>-$i+Zt

4i+3*

$i+3

’

4i+47

. . .

(Chothia, 1983). Sharp bends in a strand can be produced by strong local coiling, by having glycines with +,JI values outside the P-region (Gly-kinks) or by P-bulges. In open b-sheets with short strands there is little or no C-coiling which implies E = 0 is optimal. The major contribution to coiling in the H-direction is the angle between the plane of the peptide group and the =0---Hhydrogen bond. This angle was defined as /3 by Artymiuk 6 Blake (1981) and Baker & Hubbard (1984) have described the values found in accurately determined protein structures. The mean value of /? is close to 0” which suggests the linear arrangement (11= 0”) of hydrogen bonded peptides is optimal. (d) The relation

between the twist and coiling P-sheets and the barrel geometry

of the

The closure of a P-sheet to form a barrel structure imposes constraints upon the twist angles 0 and r and the coiling angles E and q. The nature of these constraints can be derived from the following geometrical argument. Consider first the change in strand orientation as we go around the equator of the barrel (see Figure I). Starting at the first strand, a normalized vector along the tangent to the strand makes an angle a with the barrel axis. It has a component cos a along the barrel axis and a component sin a along the circumference. Now let us traverse the P-sheet by a succession of steps going first in the C-direction (up the strand) and then in the H-direction (to the next strand). In the C-direction step the component of

[Page 5]

Theory of P-Sheet Barrels the tangent vector along the circumference changes by B/sin u. In the H-direction step the component of the tangent vector along the circumference changes by B/sin u. (By definition the values of E are positive if the strands curve towards the barrel axis; i.e. the barrel axis is on the concave side of the strands. The values are negative if the strands curve away from the axis.) Upon completing the circle round the P-sheet we have taken S steps in the C-direction and n steps in the H-direction and the total change in the circumferential component of the tangent vector is 2~. This means that for an ideal barrel: n9+&=271sina. As sin a = Sa/[(Sa)2+ (nb)‘]“’ be expressed in the form: no+&

equation

(5) can also

Table 1 The geometry of ideal regular P-sheet barrels -

s:

‘10

R (8) it

= 27cSa/[(Sa)2+(nb)2]“2.

Analogous equations relate the twist angle r and the H-coiling angle yl: Sr+nq St+nrj

= 2n cos u

= 2nnb/[(Sa)‘+

As ‘F = (a/b)@, equation the form:

R (4

(nb)2]“2.

(6) can also be expressed in

S(a/b)B+nq

= 27~cos a.

Equations (5) to (7) show that the twist and coiling angles are interdependent in P-sheet barrels. For irregular barrels, where 8, E and q are variable, the equations become sum rules, i.e. satisfied by the mean values of the angles. Note that these results differ from those in previous work in which the twist was calculated on the assumption that the barrels are cylinders made from coiled strands (McLachlan, 1979) or hyperboloids made with straight strands (Lasters et al., 1988). The twist and coiling angles calculated from both the cylinder and hyperboloid models are consistent with equations (5) and (7), but, as we show in the following section, our approach allows us to calculate optimal twist and coiling angles that are not dependent on a particular model.

(e) Optimal values of the coiling and twist angles Given that in the absence of tertiary structure constraints the most favourable values of the twist and coiling angles, 8c, E,, and qc, are close to -2O”, 0” and 0”, respectively, a closed P-sheet will have values of 8, E and r] that minimize deviations from these favourable values subject to the constraints of equations (5) and (7). The function to be minimized may be represented by:

qe, E, 9) = A(e-e0)2+B2+c$. The fact that dispersions in the observed values of 0, E and q are approximately equal (our unpublished results) suggests that the weights A, B and C have similar values and that the values of 0, E and q in ideal barrels can be determined by minimizing the

The values of the mean radius of the barrel, R, and the tilt of the strands to the barrel axis, a, were calculated from the (n, S) values using equations (1) and (3); see section 3. The optimal values of the twist angle, 8, and the coiling angles, E and q, were calculated from the (n, S) values by the procedure described in section 4(e). The 10 barrel structures with good j-sheet geometries and in which residues in j-sheet can fill the interior (see section 7) are shown without shading.

function:

f(e, E, q) = (e-8,)2+2++

subject to nt3+&

= 271sin a

S(a/b)tl+nq

= 27~cos u.

Relations (5) and (7) reduce the number of independent variables of the function to one: .m w, de)) = f(e). The optimal value for the twist angle can then be determined by the equation:

df(e) /de = 0. The optimal coiling angles, E and q, can then be calculated using equations (5) and (7). In Table 1 we give, for various ideal barrel structures, the calculated optimal values of 0, E and r,r. In real structures it is likely that there will be some deviations from the ideal values of these angles but, from equations (5) and (7) we see that they should be coupled so that: AC)+AE FZ0

[Page 6]

Theory

of P-Sheet Barrels

View for UN

. AB+Aq

z 0.

Note that, like R and a, the optimal values of 8, E and q can be calculated from n and S.

XY (f) The optimal

shear number for barrels with a . given number of strands

The minimum of the function f(e, E, r,i) is determined by the’optimal values of 8, E and q and is also dependent on n and S. This means that for a given n there is an optimal shear number S, that produces the barrel with the minimum stress in the closed /?-sheet. It can be shown that for n 2 5 the optimal shear number is related to n by the approximate equation: So = n+,/2@/&)(b/a-

View for

1)

So = n+42.

Note that So must be rounded to the nearest even integer. In practice residue packing in the interior of barrels (see section 5) overrides this relation and allows several different S values for a given n. However, in the few large barrels where the interior is not completely filled by the B-sheet residues the relation does correctly predict the shear, giving S = 12 when n = 8 and S = 20 when n = 16 (see Murzin et al., 1994). (g) The shapes of P-sheet ba.rrels

In this section we discuss the shapes of regular barrel structures. Regular barrels in which all strands are equivalent might have the shape of a cylinder with a constant value for R; the shape of a hyperboloid of revolution with the ends wider than the middle, or, even, the shape of a keg with the middle wider than the ends. a//? barrels (n = 8, S = 8) have the shape of a hyperboloid (Novotny et al., 1984; Lasters et al., 1988) but what happens in

general? The shape to be expected for p-sheet barrels can be found by the application of differential geometry. Imagine a smooth surface interpolated through the main-chain regions of the P-sheet residues: z = f(x, y). It can be shown that the twist and coiling angles 8, E and q correspond, in a particular co-ordinate system, xyz, to the second partial derivatives of this function. The origin of the co-ordinate system can be placed at any point on the barrel. The xy plane is tangent to the surface with the x axis pointing along the projection onto the plane of the local C-line and the y axis pointing along the projection of the H-line (Figure 3). In this system the function z = f(x, y) can be approximated locally as: f(x*

Y) = (x%,+xYf,,+Yxfr,+Y2fw),

where fxyr fxyr fir and f,, are the second partial derivatives. These can be identified with the twist

Cl

\

.______k .:-

la

Gem

Figure 3. Diagrams to illustrate the terms used in the calculations of barrel shape and their distortions; see sections 4(g) and 4(h). We show 3 orthogonal views a, b and c. The origin of the co-ordinate system is at 0, a point on the equator of the barrel. The xy plane is tangent to the surface at this point. The x axis points along the projection of the local C-line onto this plane; the y axis points along the projection of the H line, and the z axis points into the barrel. p is the radius of curvature of the intersection of the barrel surface with a vertical plane passing through the barrel axis. pc is the radius of curvature of the intersection of the barrel surface with a horizodal plane passing through the barrel equator. H is a point at height h above the equator in a direction of the barrel axis. G is a point on the equator in the vicinity of the origin. 1 is the distance between the origin, 0, and the projection of the point G on the xy plane.

[Page 7]

Theory of &Sheet Barrels and coiling angles:

fx, = e/b =fyx = r/a,

fXX = E/a,

f,,

= q/b. (10)

Now we can apply these results to calculate how the barrel radius varies as we move away from the equator (Figure 3). If (1) the origin of the local coordinate system, 0. is on the equator; (2) the x and y axes are chosen so the 2 direction points into the barrel, and (3) the point H is at a height h above (or below) the equator and along the barrel axis; the local co-ordinates of H are: x = h cos a,

y = -h sin a

2 = -h2/p,

Hence l/p = [2(8/b)sin a cos a - (e/a)cos2 a- (a/b)sin2 a]/2.

If this expression is positive (p > 0), the barrel is wider at the ends than in the middle, i.e. the barrel has the shape of a hyperboloid of revolution. If it is negative the barrel will have the shape of a keg with the barrel wider in the middle than at the ends. In Table 1 we give, for the barrel structures that are expected to occur in proteins, a and the optimal values of the twist and coiling angles, 0, E and q. Substitution of these values into equation (12) shows that for all these structures the radius of curvature is positive. In fact it can be shown that it is positive for any (n S) value. This means that all P-sheet barrels are expected to be wider at their ends and so have the average shape of a hyperboloid of revolution. Typically, at the top and bottom of a barrel, where h z 6 A, AR z 1.0 to 1.8 A. Note that because n and S determine the values of a, 0, E and ‘I, they also determine the values of p and AR. (h) Distortions

2 = 1 sin a,

y = 1 cos a, and z = 12/2p,,

where p,-, is the radius of curvature of the equator in the region of 0. We have seen in the last section that z = f(x, y) and using equations (9) and (10) we get: z = 12/2p, = [2(B/b)sin a cos a + (&/a)sin2 a + (q/b)cos2 a]12/2,

and, therefore

where p is the radius of curvature of the intersection of the barrel surface with a vertical plane passing through the barrel axis. The value of z( = f (x, y)), or more exactly -2, corresponds to the increment in the radius, AR where, from (9) and (10): AR = [2(8/b)sin a cos a - (&/a)cos2 a - (q/b)sin2 a]h2/2.

let 1 be the distance between 0 and the projection of the point G on the xy plane (Figure 3). The coordinates of point G are:

in barrel structures

In the previous section we discussed the shapes of regular barrels: those in which each starand is equivalent. As discussed in the accompanying paper most observed barrel structures show, to a greater or lesser extent, distortion that flattens the barrel SO it has an elliptical cross section rather than a circular one. Such deformations are produced by local variations in the twist and coiling angles and in this section we discuss the relation between the local variations in these angles and the shape of the equatorial cross-section of the barrel. We use the local co-ordinate system described in the Iast section, with the origin, 0, placed at a point on the equator of the barrel and the axes pointing in the same direction as before. Now let G be another point on the equator in the vicinity of the origin and

l/p, = 2(8/b)sin a cos a + (+)sin2

a+ (q/b)cos2 a.

If the twist and coiling angles are constants that satisfy equations (5) and (7), the radius of curvature is the barrel radius R, as defined by equation (4). In flattened barrels the local curvature of the equator changes between strands and, therefore, the twist and coiling angles must also change. The symmetrical nature of the coiling and twist about C and H-lines means that we would expect the changes in both angles to be correlated in producing the distortions in the barrels. This implies that the shape of the equatorial cross-section is given by a simple function of the kind: G(8, E) = e+E,

where 8 and E are the twist and coiling angles for individual strands in the region of the equator. Maxima of the function G(8, E), that is strands with high values of O+E, will have small values of p. and a high radius of curvature. Such strands will form “corners” in the equatorial cross-section of the barrel. Similarly, strands with low values of 0+& give minima in the function, have a low radius of curvature and form the “sides” of the equatorial cross-section. An elliptical cross-section with high axial ratio has two corners and two sides. However, there can be, in principle, up to n/2 corners which would give the cross-section the shape of polygon.

5. Residue Packing in the Barrel Interior (a) The effect of n, S values on the side to side contacts of residues in the interior of barrels Consider first the neighbours of a residue in a flat b-sheet. The general arrangement is a rectangular array. Along the chains, in the C-direction, consecutive side-chains alternate between the two sides of the P-sheet and a residue has its closest neighbours at a distance of 2a. In the H-direction side-chains on one side of the P-sheet form rows that come from adjacent (rather than alternate) strands (Figure 4(a)) and they have their closest neighbours at a distance of b. We can describe these adjacent residues as being at (2a, 0) and (0, lb), respectively, where the quantities (x, y) are the components of their position vectors. The neighbours beyond these

[Page 8]

Theory of B-Sheet Barrels

(2W

Flat sheet

Barrel

Figure 4. Potential residue contacts in the interior of P-sheet barrels. (a) For a residue at the origin. 0, neighbouring residues occur at sites A, B, C and D. The components of each contact vector OA. OB, OC and OD are given in brackets. y is the angle between the H direction and the contact vectors (see section 5(a)). (b) Effect of barrel format.ion on residue contacts. Two orthogonal views are given of a row of 3 residues (open spheres) in a flat sheet and a barrel. On barrel formation the horizontal component of the contact vector between side-chains can be reduced by half. The broken spheres show how steric collisions can be avoided by rotational isomerization. Note that these shifts can occur only in a direction approximately parallel to the barrel axis.

are at the diagonal positions (2a, lb) and (2a, 2b). which, in a flat p-sheet, are at a distance of 8 A and 11 A (Figure 4). Now consider how the relative positions of these neighbours are affected if the P-sheet forms a barrel structure. As the interior side-chains converge towards the centre of the barrel the distance between them decreases (Figure 4(b)). The sets of residues most strongly affected are those that lie closest to planes perpendicular to the barrel axis, two

because this is where the curvature greatest.

of the P-sheet is

The distance between residues on the barrel surface (i.e. between c” atoms) is only marginally

short.er t,han the flat P-sheet values rl,; at a point midway between the surface and the barrel axis the distance d, is significantly shorter and is given by the equation: d c x d&--

(~/~)cos~(~--cx)]“~,

(Ifi)

where y is the angle between the H-direction and the line joining the two side-chains (see Figure a(a)).

The angle is given by the equation: tan y = x/y. For the (0, lb) pair y is O”, for (2a, 0) it is 90”, for (2a, lb) its is 56”, and for (2a, 2b) it is 37”.

[Page 9]

Theory of B-Sheet Barrels Thus, for particular pairs of residues, the values of d, and y are fixed and this means that the values of d, and, therefore, the general arrangement of side-chains in the barrel interior is determined by a which, in turn, is determined by n and S. Certain (n, S) combinations (i.e. certain ranges of the angle a) will produce very short residue to residue distances. In principle, an appropriate combination of side-chain conformations might relax potential steric collisions. However, such relaxations would have to point the side-chains along the axial direction of the barrel (Figure 4(b)). If the axial direction coincides with, or is close to, one of the short inter-residue distances, (0, lb) or (2a, 0) relaxation would not be possible for any but the smallest residues. This means that the formation of barrels with very small values of a (i.e. S << n) or very large values of a (i.e. S >> n) is unlikely. In the following sections we consider what happens for barrels with intermediate values; first, the special cases where S = n or S = 2n, then the range where n < S < 2n and finally barrels with S < n or S > 2n.

(b) Packing in barrels where S = n or S = 2n As described in the last section, the formation of the barrel structure from a flat P-sheet has the effect of bringing closer together the residues on the side that faces the interior. When the ratio S/n is equal to 1 or 2, particular sets of residues lie exactly in planes perpendicular to the barrel axis and form stacked layers (Figure 5). When S = n the tilt of the strands to the barrel axis is 37” and residues of the type (0, 0), (2a, 2b), (4a, 46), . . . (i. e. residues from alternate strands) are in planes perpendicular to the barrel axis (Figure 5). For these residues the value of d, is half that of d,. The distances between the (0, 0), (2a, lb), . . . residues, which are inclined at about 20” to the equatorial plane, are reduced by nearly a half. The distances between the other sets of residues are only reduced a little. When S = 2n the tilt of the strands to the barrel axis is 56” and residues of the type (0, 0), (2a, b), (4a, 2b), . . . (i.e. residues from neighbouring strands) are in planes perpendicular to the barrel axis and residues of the type (0,O) (2a, 2b) are inclined at about 20” (Figure 5). As before, these sets of residues have a value of d, that is half, or nearly half, of d,,. These results show that the side to side packing is rather restricted in these two classes of barrels. In cases where small residues fill barrels of small radius this may not matter. But in most cases R is 6 to 3 A and this requires at least several large residues in each layer if the interior is to be close packed. Such large residues can relieve steric collisions by protruding out of their layers towards the ends of the barrel. In the S = n and S = 2n barrels this is facilitated by the layers of residues being staggered (Figure 5).

(c) Packing in barrels where n < S < 2n In barrels with n < S < 2n the a angles are close to 45” (Table 1). This means no set of residues is actually in the equatorial plane (Figure 6). The residues closest to it are the two diagonal sets (2a, lb) and (2a, 2b) which have residues furthest apart. Furthermore, the residue rows (2a, 0) and (0, lb) are tilted at about 45” to the barrel axis. This is the best orientation for the relaxation of steric collisions via rotational isomerization. Thus, in general, barrels with n < S < 2n have the least constraints on the residue packing. It is interesting that true barrels (those where S = n and S = 2n) and orthogonal barrels (those where n < S < 2n) tend to have different distortions. Because of the rotational symmetry of the interior residues, true barrels tend to have fairly circular cross-sections unless the residues vary greatly in size. In contrast the asymmetric arrangement of the interior residues in orthogonal barrels tend to favour distortions in which the barrel is flattened so that two opposite sides pack together (Chothia & Janin, 1982). As the direction of the (2a, 1b) residues on one side is nearly parallel to the direction of the (2a, 2b) residues on the other, these residues may produce a layer-like arrangement. (d) Packing in barrels where S < n or S > 2n Barrels with these geometries have greater constraints than in the cases just discussed. When S < n the distances between residues of the (0, lb) direction drops to about 3 A and those between residues along the (2a, 2b) diagonal are reduced by a half. In addition residues are less able to protrude out of their layer because there is less stagger in the residue positions in the different layers. When S > 2n the distances in (2a, 0) and (2a. lb) directions are reduced in a similar manner and again the relaxation is restricted by the layer having little stagger. These features suggest that barrels with S < n or S > 2n could be stable only for very special combinations of side-chains and are therefore expected to be rare or not to occur. (e) The mean volume of interior residues If the inward pointing residues of the P-sheet fill the interior of a barrel their total volume must depend upon its radius. The mean volume available to an interior residue is twice the volume that is bounded on the outside by the area ab on the sheet surface and on the inside by the barrel axis: V = abR. More precisely we should subtract the portion of the residue’s main-chain that does not contribute to the interior, V,. This gives the relation between the mean volume of the interior residues and the barrel radius as: V-

V,, = abR.

[Page 10]

Theory qf B-Sheet Barrels Potential layers of interior RddWS

Strands

Strands

-

Strands

Figure 5. The arrangement of residues in the interior of barrels for which S = ~1.and 8 = 112. hawings are shown of the unrolled P-sheets that form ideal barrels of the type n = 4. S = 8; n = 5. S = 10: R = 6, 8 = 12, and 1~= 8. S = 8. Filled circles represent sites that potentially form the barrel interior. The barrel axes are vertical. In barrels where A’= ~tl t,he value of a is 56” and sets of residues with the relative poskions (0.0). (2~. lb), (4~. 26), . . form layers perpendicular to the barrel axis. Each strand contributes to each layer so they contain n residues. In barrels where &’= n the value of a is 37” and sets of residues with the relative positions (0.0). (2~ .26). (4a. 4b), form layers perpendicular to the barrel axis. In this case alternate strands contribute residues to alternate layers so that each layer has n/2 residues,

In practice,

we should expect this relation to be only approximate because large residues can extend

from the ends of the barrel and cavities within barrel can be filled by residues from outside.

the

6. Chain Topology in B-Sheet Barrels The analysis of the known structures of P-sheet proteins has shown that there are clear regularities in the topology of the polypeptide chain that can be

expressed in terms of three rules that hold in almost all cases. (1) Pieces of secondary structure that are adjacent. in the sequence are often in contact in three dimensions (Levitt & Chothia. Richardson, 1977; Finkelstein 8z Ptitsyn. Ptitsyn & Finkelstein, 1979). (2) The connections in /3-X-/3 units (where the fis a.re parallel strands in the same fl-sheet, though not necessarily adjacent, and S is an cr-helix, a strand in

[Page 11]

Theory of P-Sheet Barrels

barrel axes for S=lO 1 b),... row

Strand Figure 6. The asymmetric arrangement of residues in the interior of barrels where n < S < 2n. As an example of the sorts of residue arrangements found in these classes of barrels, we show what, can be found in the barrels formed by a g-stranded /?-sheet. An unrolled 6-stranded /?-sheetwith the first strand drawn twice is shown here. To form a barrel with S = 8; the 2 strands 1 are superposed so that A lies on A’ for S = 8 and the line joining the 2 points is perpendicular to the barrel axis. Similarly to form a barrel with S = 10 the strands are superposed with A lying on A’ for S = 10 and the line joining these 2 points is perpendicular to the barrel axis. In both cases the sets of residues that form layers in the S = n and S = 2n barrels (the (0, 0). (2a, lb), (4a, 26). . and the (O,O), (2a, 2b), (4a, 46), . . . residues) are tilted relative to the barrel axis and cannot form a simple layer structure.

a different P-sheet or an extended piece of polypeptide) are right-handed (Sternberg & Thornton, 1976, 1977; Richardson, 1977; Nagano, 1977). (3) The connections between secondary structures neither cross each other nor make knots in the chain (Richardson, 1977; Finkelstein & Ptitsyn, Connolly et nl., 1980; Klapper & Klapper, 1980). Combinations of these rules produce the “Greek Key” topology that describe common arrangements of sets of strands that are adjacent in the sequence (Richardson, 1977, 1981; Efimov, 1982; Chirgadze, 1987; Woolfson et al., 1993). The physical origins of the rules have been elucidated by Finkelstein & Ptitsyn (1987). In barrel structures rule (1) favours the local connectivity of strands and rule (3) limits the connections that can be made across the ends of the barrel. Rule (2) plays a dominant role in determining the chain connectivity of the a/P barrel proteins (Sternberg et al., 1981).

7. The Repertoire

of B-Sheet Barrel Structures

In the preceding sections we described how the main characteristics of barrel structures, the radius and strand tilt and the twist and coiling angles of the /?-sheet, are determined by, and can be calculated from, the strand and shear numbers (n, S). This shows that barrels with the same (n, S) values have very similar three-dimensional structures, if differences in chain topology are ignored. It also shows that barrels can be classified in terms of just their (n, S) values.

In Table 1 we list, for barrels with 4 to 8 strands and shear numbers 6 to 14, the calculated values of these characteristics. Here we discuss the possibilities of these potential structures being observed in protein molecules. In section 6 we described how the different n/S ratios give different arrangements of residues in the barrel interior and how it is likely that barrels with S < n and S > 2n either do not occur or are rare. Large hydrophobic residues (Leu, Phe, etc.) cannot fill barrels with radii greater than about 8.0 A (Murzin et al., 1992). This means that, if we make the assumption that the interior of the barrel must be close packed by the inward pointing residues of the /J-sheet, S values must be less than 14 or, when n is 7 or greater, S must be less than 12 (Table 1). Barrels with S values of 6 have high values for both the twist angle 0 and the roiling angle q. These would limit severely the hydrogen bonding between adjacent strands. In addition when S = 6 and the value of n is small the barrel radii are too small to accommodate side-chains. Taken together these considerations suggest strongly that P-sheet barrel structures in proteins will come from one of ten (n, S) classes: those where S = 8 and n = 4 to 8; where S = 10 and n = 5 to 8, and where S = 12 and n = 6 (Table 1). It should be emphasised, however, that we have assumed here that the barrels have their interiors close packed by residues from the P-sheet and that there is no special amino acid sequence. If these factors do not apply, structures beyond these ten classes may well occur (Murzin et al., 1994).

[Page 12]

Theory of /?-Sheet Barrels

8. Conclusions

References

In this paper we have tried to develop for an entire group of protein structures a comprehensive, explicit and simple set of principles. The main features can be summarized as follows. (1) b-Sheet barrel structures can be classified -according to two integral parameters: the number of strands, n and the shear number S, as proposed by McL&chlan (1979). The geometrical properties of barrels can be calculated from their (n, S) values. (2) The mew slope of the strands to the barrel axis, a, and the mean radius of the barrel, R, are related to n and S by:

Artymiuk, P. C Blake C. (1981). Refinement of human lysozyme at 1.5 A resolution: analysis of non-bonded and hydrogen bond interactions. J. Mol. Biol. 152, 737-763. Baker, E. N. & Hubbard, R. E. (1984). Hydrogen bonding in globular proteins. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 44, 97-179. Birktoft, J. J. & Blow, D. M. (1972). Structure of crystalline a-chymotrypsin. J. Mol. Biol. 68, 187-240. Chirgadze, Y. N. (1987). Deduction and systematic classification of spatial motifs of the antiparallel /%-structure in globular proteins. Acta. Cryslallogr. sect. A, 43, 405-417. Chothia, C. (1973). Conformation of twisted b-sheets in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 75, 295-302. Chothia, C. (1983). Coiling of j-pleated sheets. ./. Mol. Biol. 163, 107-117. Chothia, C. & Finkelstein, A. V. (1990). The classification and origins of protein folding patterns. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59, 1007-1039. Chothia, C. $ Janin, J. (1981). Relative orientation of close-packed j-pleated sheets in proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., U.S.A. 78, 41464150. Chothia, C. & Janin, J. (1982) Orthogonal packing of p-pleated sheets in proteins. Biochemistry, 3955-3965. Chothia, C., Levitt, M. & Richardson, D. (1977). Structure of proteins: packing of a-helices and P-sheets. Proc. Nat. Bead. Sci., U.S.A. 74, 413&4134. Chou, K.-C., Nemethy, G. & Scheraga, H. A. (1983). Role of interchain interactions in the stabilization of t,he right-handed twist of P-sheets. .J. Mol. Biol. 168, 389-407. Cohen, F. E., Sternberg, M. J. E. & Taylor, W. R. (1981). Analysis of the tertiary structure of protein b-sheet sandwiches. J. Mol. Biol. 148, 253-272. Connolly, M. L., Kuntz, I. D. & Crippen, G. M. (1980). Linked and threaded loops in proteins. Biopolymers, 19, 1167-I 182. Efimov, A. V. (1982). Supersecondary structure of P-proteins. Mol. Biol. 16, 799-806. Finkelstein, A. V. & Ptitsyn, 0. B. (1979). Folding and topology of the antiparallel p-structure. Biofizika.. 24. 21-26. Finkelstein, A. V. & Ptitsyn. 0. B. (1987). Why do globular proteins fit the limited set of folding patterns. Progr. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 50, 171-190. Ke, H. (1992). Similarit,ies and differences between human cyclophilin A and other p-barrel structures. J. Mol. Biol. 228, 5X%550. Klapper, M. H. & Klapper, I. Z. (1980). The “knotting” problem in proteins: loop penetration. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 626, 97-105. Lasters, I. (1990). Estimating the twist of P-strands embedded within a regular parallel P-barrel structure. Protein Eng. 4, 133-135. Lasters, I., Wodak, S. J. Alard, P. & Van Cutsem, E. (1988). Structural principles of parallel P-barrels in proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., IJ.S.A. 3338-3342. Lasters, I., Wodak, S. J. & Pio, F. (1990). The design of idealized a/B-barrels: analysis of P-sheet closure requirements. Proteins, 7, 249-256. Lesk, A. M., BrlindBn, C.-I. & Chothia, C. (1989). Structural principles of a//I barrel proteins: the packing of the interior of the sheet. Proteins, 5, 139-148.

tan a = Salnb

R = [(Sa)? + (nb)2]1’2/[2n sin(+)],

as deduced previou$ly by McLachlan (1979). (3) The mean twist and coiling angles of the b-sheet, 0, E and q, are related to these geometrical features by: 7&+&=2~sina

S(a/b)B + nq = 271costl

and optimal values of these angles can be calculated by minimizing the function:

f(e,.E,tj) = (8-8,)2+2+~2

subject to the constraints of equations (5) and (7). (4) In general barrels have the shape of an hyperboloid of revolution. (5) The shape produced by distortions of the circular cross-section of barrels can be deduced from the values for each strand of the function: G(0, E) = e+E.

Strands with high values form corners and those with low values form flattened sides. (6) Packing constraints will favour structures with n 5 S 5 2n. In barrels where S=n or S =2n the residues in the interior of the barrel will tend to form symmetrical layers in planes perpendicular to its axis. For n < S < 2n the packing is more complicated. (7) The mean volume of residues in the interior of the barrel, V, is roughly proportional to its radius: V-

V, = abR.

(8) Barrel structures in which residues from the /?-sheet fill the interior and have low conformational energies are likely to have structures corresponding to one of ten sets of values of (n, S) (Table 1). In the accompanying paper (Murzin et al., 1994) we demonstrate the validity of these relationships by an analysis of all observed protein structures that contain P-sheet barrels and for which atomic co-ordinates are available. We acknowledge the support of an EMBO long term fellowship (A.G.M.) and the Kay Kendell Foundation (A.M.L.).

[Page 13]

Theory of &Sheet Barrels Levitt, M. & Chothia, C. (1976). Structural patterns in globular proteins. Nature (London), 261, 552-558. McLachlan, A. D. (1979). Gene duplications in the structural evolution of chymotrypsin. J. Mol. Biol. 128, 49-79. Murzin, A. G. (1992). Structural principles for the propeller assembly of j-sheets: the preference for seven-fold symmetry. Proteins, 14, 191-201. Murzin, A. G., Lesk, A. M. & Chothia, C. (1992). p-trefoil fold. J. Mol. Biol. 223, 531-543. Murzin, A. G., Lesk, A. M. & Chothia, C. (1994). Principles determining the structure of /l-sheet barrels in proteins. II. The observed structures. J. Mol. Biol. 236, 1382-1400. Nagano, K. (1977). Logical analysis of the mechanism of protein folding: IV super-secondary structures. ‘J. Mol. Biol. 109, 235-250. Nishikawa, K. & Scheraga, H. A. (1976). Geometrical criteria for formation of coiled-coil structures of polypeptide chains. Macromolecules, 9, 365407. Novotny, J., Bruccoleri, R. E. & Newell J. (1984). Twisted hyperboloid (Slrophoid) as a model of j-barrels in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 177, 567-573. Ptitsyn, 0. B. & Finkelstein, A. V. (1979). Folding and topology of the parallel p-structure. Biojizika, 24, 27-31. Richardson, J. S. (1977). P-Sheet topology and the relatedness of proteins. Nature (London), 49.5-500. Richardson, J. S. (1981). The anatomy and taxonomy of protein structure. Advan. Protein Chem. 34, 167-339. Salemme, F. R. (1981). Conformational and geometrical properties of P-sheets in proteins. III. Isotropically stressed configurations. J. Mol. Biol. 146, 143-156.

Salemme, F. R. & Weatherford, D. W. (1981a). Conformational and geometrical properties of b-sheets in proteins. I. Parallel p-sheets. J. Mol. Biol. 146, 101-117. Salemme, F. R. & Weatherford, D. W. (1981b). Conformational and geometrical properties of B-sheets in proteins. II. Antiparallel and mixed p-sheets. J. Mol. Biol. 146, 119-141. Schellman, J. A. & Schellman, C. (1964). The conformation of polypeptide chains in proteins. In TL Proteina (Neurath, H., ed.), pp. 1-137, Academic Press, New York. Sowdhamini, R., Srinivasan, N., Ramakrishnan, C. & Balaram, P. (1992). Orthogonal /I/I motifs in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 223, 845-851. Sternberg, M. J. E. & Thornton, J. M. (1976). On the conformation of proteins: the handedness of the /I-strand-a-helix-/I-strand unit. J. Mol. Biol. 105, 367-382. Sternberg, M. J. E. & Thornton, J. M. (1977). On the conformation of proteins: the handedness of the connection between parallel p-strands. J. Mol. Biol. 110, 269-283. Sternberg, M. J. E. Cohen, F. E., Taylor, W. R. & Feldmann, R. J. (1981). Analysis and prediction of structural motifs in the glycolytic enzymes. Phil. Trans, Roy. Sot. ser. B, 263, 177-189. Woolfson, D. N., Evans, P. A., Hutchinson, E. G. & Thornton, J. (1993). Topological and stereochemical restrictions in fl-sandwich protein structures. Protein En.g. 6, 461470.

Edited by F. Cohen

(Received

1 September 1993; accepted 8 December 1993)
