[Page 1]

RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Multiscale structure of chromatin condensates explains phase separation and material properties

Full article and list of author affiliations:

https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.adv6588

Huabin Zhou, Jan Huertas, M. Julia Maristany, Kieran Russell, June Ho Hwang, Run-Wen Yao, Nirnay Samanta, Joshua Hutchings, Ramya Billur, Momoko Shiozaki, Xiaowei Zhao, Lynda K. Doolittle, Bryan A. Gibson, Andrea Soranno, Margot Riggi, Jorge R. Espinosa, Zhiheng Yu, Elizabeth Villa, Rosana Collepardo-Guevara*, Michael K. Rosen*

RATIONALE: Chromatin fibers are composed of nucleosomes connected by DNA linkers. Previous work showed that linker length influences phase separation of fibers, through an unknown structural mechanism. By integrating (i) cryo–electron tomography (cryo-ET) to capture nucleosome organization and fiber structure, (ii) molecular simulations to quantify how histone tails contribute to nucleosome interactions, and (iii) light microscopy to measure droplet dynamics and viscoelasticity, we investigated how the nanoscale arrangement of nucleosomes determines the material properties and stability of chromatin condensates. We sought a multiscale structural framework to connect DNA linker length, nucleosome arrangement, histone tail interactions, and condensate material properties. By integrating insights from each scale, we explained how linker length tunes condensate behavior. Lastly, we compared these in vitro condensates to chromatin domains inside cells. RESULTS: Using synthetic chromatin fibers with 25-or 30–base pair (bp) DNA linkers, we uncovered how differences in linker length lead to different intramolecular geometry and consequent changes in condensate behavior: 1) Nucleosome array structures: (i) 25-bp chromatin forms flexible, open fibers with nucleosomes facing outward; (ii) 30-bp chromatin adopts compact, stacked configurations where

Chromatin organization across scales. Cryo-ET and computer simulations reveal how DNA linker length controls multiscale chromatin organization. Twenty-five–base pair linker chromatin forms open, flexible structures enabling dense intermolecular networks in condensates. Conversely, 30-bp chromatin adopts compact, intramolecular stacked conformations, creating weakly connected networks. These structural difference explain why 25-bp condensates show enhanced phase separation, slower dynamics, and higher viscoelasticity than 30-bp condensates.

Monomer

CONCLUSION: By integrating experiments and simulations from

single nucleosomes to molecular networks, applied to biochemically reconstituted synthetic chromatin and native chromatin in nuclei, we demonstrate that changes in DNA linker length steer chromatin condensate architecture and mechanics across scales from nanometers to micrometers. This multiscale framework reveals how cells could switch chromatin between material states—affecting gene regulation and genome stability—through changes in nucleosome spacing, histone modifications, or associated factors. 

*Corresponding author. Email: rc597@​cam.​ac.​uk (R.C.G.); michael.​rosen@​utsouthwestern.​ edu (M.K.R.) Cite this article as H. Zhou et al., Science 390, eadv6588 (2025). DOI: 10.1126/ science.adv6588

Dimer

Trimer

Array

Interarray

Condensate

25 bp

30 bp

10 nm

nucleosomes interact within fibers, forming two-start helices; (iii) histone tails make different interactions to stabilize the 25-and 30-bp fiber conformations. 2) Nucleosome array interactions in condensates: (i) conformations of 25-bp fibers enable numerous high-affinity intermolecular interactions; (ii) conformations of 30-bp fibers lead to fewer and lower-affinity intermolecular interactions; (iii) histone tails make different interactions to stabilize intermolecular contacts in the two condensate types; (iv) differences in intermolecular interactions explain the greater stability of 25-versus 30-bp condensates. 3) Condensate material properties: (i) the strongly connected 25-bp network yields condensates with viscous and elastic behaviors, with slow molecular diffusion and high resistance to dissolution; (ii) the weakly connected 30-bp network yields condensates with purely viscous behaviors, with more rapid molecular diffusion and ready dissolution by acetylation. 4) Native chromatin parallels: Dense chromatin clusters in human and mouse cells mirror 25-bp condensates, exhibiting nonrandom packing with occasional stacked regions. Cells may use linker length variations to tune chromatin states at short and long length scales.

100 nm

1 μm

INTRODUCTION: Biomolecular condensates are membraneless compartments that concentrate macromolecules and contribute to numerous cellular processes. Chromatin, the complex of DNA and histone proteins that stores genetic information, can phase separate into condensates in the test tube and in cells. It has been unclear how individual DNA-histone units (nucleosomes) come together across scales—from single particles to visible condensates—and how these interactions set condensate material properties. In this study, we bridge that gap with a multiscale investigation of chromatin condensates.

[Page 2]

MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Multiscale structure of chromatin condensates explains phase separation and material properties Huabin Zhou1,2, Jan Huertas3,4,5,2, M. Julia Maristany3,5,2, Kieran Russell3,2, June Ho Hwang1,2, Run-Wen Yao1,2, Nirnay Samanta6,7, Joshua Hutchings8†, Ramya Billur9, Momoko Shiozaki10, Xiaowei Zhao10, Lynda K. Doolittle1,2, Bryan A. Gibson9,2, Andrea Soranno6,7, Margot Riggi11, Jorge R. Espinosa3,2‡, Zhiheng Yu10, Elizabeth Villa8,12, Rosana Collepardo-Guevara3,4,5,2*, Michael K. Rosen1,2*

Cells are organized on length scales from nanometers to micrometers. Biomolecular condensates concentrate molecules into discrete foci without surrounding membranes, exemplifying how nanoscale molecular interactions can produce micron-scale cellular organization. Many condensates appear to form through assembly and concomitant phase separation of multivalent macromolecules (1–3). The structure and dynamics of individual molecules, and of their multivalencyenabled interaction networks, strongly influence the macroscopic physical properties of condensates (4–6). Physical properties, along with solution environment and composition, define the biochemical and cellular functions of condensates (7–16). These features of condensates are altered in diseases and have been suggested as therapeutic targets (17, 18). An important goal in biology and human health is to understand the relationships between the molecular structure and dynamics, network architecture and dynamics, and function of condensates. Molecules within condensates are often conformationally flexible and interact weakly and transiently, producing complex distributions of interconverting states. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy has revealed structural ensembles and residue-specific interactions of

Department of Biophysics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. 2Marine Biological Laboratory Chromatin Collaborative, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA. 3Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 4Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. Maxwell Centre, Cavendish Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 6Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. 7Center for Biomolecular Condensates, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. 8School of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. 9Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA. 10Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA, USA. 11Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried/Munich, Germany. 12Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. *Corresponding author. Email: rc597@​cam.​ac.​uk (R.C.G.); michael.​rosen@​utsouthwestern.​edu (M.K.R.) †Present address: Chan Zuckerberg Institute for Advanced Biological Imaging (CZ Imaging Institute), Redwood City, CA, USA. ‡Present address: Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

The structure and interaction networks of molecules within biomolecular condensates are poorly understood. Using cryo– electron tomography and molecular dynamics simulations, we elucidated the structure of phase-separated chromatin condensates across scales, from individual amino acids to network architecture. We found that internucleosomal DNA linker length controls nucleosome arrangement and histone tail interactions, shaping the structure of individual chromatin molecules within and outside condensates. This structural modulation determines the balance between intra-and intermolecular interactions, which governs the molecular network, thermodynamic stability, and material properties of chromatin condensates. Mammalian nuclei contain dense clusters of nucleosomes whose nonrandom organization is mirrored by the reconstituted condensates. Our work explains how the structure of individual chromatin molecules determines physical properties of chromatin condensates and cellular chromatin organization.

intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of proteins within condensates (19–21). But these studies have not strongly informed on the higher-order organization of these elements within condensates. On micrometer-length scales, cryo–electron tomography (cryo-ET) has been used to characterize the morphology of condensates (22–29) but has not connected mesoscale features to molecular interactions that form the compartments. Computational work has sought to bridge molecular interactions to the network architecture of intrinsically disordered protein (IDP) condensates, providing insight into viscoelasticity and surface tension (5, 30–32). But these models are difficult to test experimentally owing to the challenge of directly visualizing molecules and interactions inside condensates. Because of these complexities, we still lack a complete understanding from molecular structure and interactions to mesoscale organization and dynamics for any condensate. Phase separation is thought to play an important role in the organization of eukaryotic chromatin, enabling compaction necessary for storage in the nucleus while retaining dynamics necessary for function (33–43). Chromatin fibers are arrays of nucleosomes—structural units containing ~147 base pairs (bp) of DNA wrapped around an octamer of histone proteins (44)—connected by DNA linkers of diverse lengths. Nucleosome arrays compact along their lengths and interact with one another (45), creating higher-order cellular structures ranging from 10-to 100-nm clusters (46–48) to 100-to 300-nm domains (49, 50). The compaction and dynamics of nucleosomes are highly regulated, affecting nuclear processes including transcription (51–53), DNA replication, and DNA repair (54). Interactions between biochemically reconstituted nucleosome arrays can drive salt-dependent phase separation, which is dependent on the disordered tails of histones (33, 35, 55–60). Posttranslational modifications of histone tails, including acetylation and methylation, can regulate phase separation and biological functions (33, 38, 57). Phase separation is also modulated by the length of internucleosome DNA linkers; the drive to phase separate shows an oscillatory pattern as linkers are extended, stronger for 10N + 5 base pairs (integer N) and weaker for 10N base pairs (33). These behaviors, along with genomic data and modeling, suggest that phase separation of the chromatin polymer plays a role in genome organization in vivo (33, 35, 57–61). Numerous studies have examined the structure of native chromatin fibers, using different modalities of light and electron microscopy (46, 49, 62–66) as well as chemical cross-linking (67, 68). These have revealed that chromatin inside cells and nuclei consists mostly of irregular conformations, although small segments of ordered, stacked groups of nucleosomes have also been observed (62, 65, 69, 70). Most of these studies focused on the conformations of individual fibers rather than the structural basis of interactions between them. However, in one study, pairwise internucleosome interactions revealed a wide distribution of packing geometries (65). The relationship between the conformations, interactions, and networking of fibers to the density and material properties of chromatin in cells is not known. In this study, we integrated cryo-ET, computer simulations, and light microscopy to understand mechanisms of phase separation and physical properties of synthetic and native chromatin. We found that nucleosome linker length controls salt-dependent conformations and histone tail interactions of chromatin fibers. These properties dictate the strength and number of interactions between fibers in condensates, which then define the network structure of the condensates. These physical features explain the driving force for chromatin phase

[Page 3]

Distinct phase separation propensity and dynamics of 25-and 30-bp chromatin

separation as well as viscoelastic properties of chromatin condensates. Dense 100-to 300-nm clusters of native chromatin in situ show a similar, nonrandom distribution of internucleosome contacts as one class of synthetic chromatin. Together, our studies provide an understanding of chromatin phase separation from nanometers to micrometers and suggest that certain reconstituted chromatin condensates may functionally mimic important features of native chromatin.

0.14 0.37 0.75 1.50 3.00

Concentration (μM)

120 180 240 300

High salt

Condensed

Dilute

low salt

90°

Time (s)

Low salt

Length scale (μm)

FRAP Normalized Fluor Intensity

Turbidity (A345 nm)

Tau (s)

We generated dodecameric nucleosome arrays based on the Widom 601 sequence (71, 72), with either 25-or 30-bp internucleosomal DNA linkers (25-or 30-bp chromatin, respectively). As previously reported (33), 25-bp chromatin phase separates at lower concentration and at lower ionic strength than 30-bp chromatin (Fig. 1A). The 25-bp

high salt

overlay

25-bp, low salt 25-bp, high salt

salt

salt

30-bp, low salt 30-bp, high salt

Fig. 1. Linker length determines condensate properties and chromatin fiber structure. (A) Turbidity (absorption at 345 nm) of chromatin solutions at the indicated nucleosome concentrations. Error bars indicate ± standard deviation of three measurements. (B) Time-lapse imaging of droplet fusion in 25-and 30 bp-chromatin immediately after inducing phase separation. Scale bar, 3 μm. (C) Timescale of fusion for 25-and 30-bp chromatin droplets of different sizes. (D) FRAP results for 25-and 30-bp chromatin. Error bars indicate ± standard deviation of 20 measurements. (E) Schematic of the compaction and phase separation of chromatin fibers as salt concentration increases (left and middle panels) and visualized by cryo-ET (right panel), where scale bar is 100 nm. Boxed array derives from dilute-phase cryo-ET image in (F). (F) Schematic of the computational approach used to reconstruct histone tails on a single chromatin array visualized by cryo-ET in low salt. From left to right: maximum projection of chromatin density in a denoised cryo-ET tomogram; nucleosome models extracted from the density [corresponding to fiber boxed in (E); scale bars, 20 nm]; and higher-resolution fiber computationally reconstructed using molecular dynamics simulations steered according to nucleosome positions in the cryo-ET data. (G and H) Models based on average structural parameters of chromatin with 25-bp (G) and 30-bp (H) linkers in the dilute phase at low (left) and high (middle) salt concentrations. Right panels show overlays of the two conditions. (I) Schematic representation of the conformational changes induced by salt in 25-and 30-bp chromatin.

[Page 4]

chromatin droplets fuse more slowly than 30-bp chromatin droplets (Fig. 1B, C), and recover more slowly in partial droplet fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) experiments (Fig. 1D). We sought to understand these differences in phase separation propensity and material properties using cryo-ET and simulations (Fig. 1E).

Salt differentially compacts 25-and 30-bp chromatin

Salt differentially reorganizes histone tail interactions

To gain insight into the histone tail interactions driving salt-dependent chromatin compaction, we combined experimental cryo-ET data with computational simulations, using a chemically specific coarse-grained model (88, 89), which represents chromatin at amino acid and nucleotide resolution (Fig. 2, A to D, and table S1). We simulated a series of arrays observed in the cryo-ET tomograms, restraining the nucleosome

We collected cryo-ET data in low-and high-salt conditions (0 and 150 mM potassium acetate, respectively) for solutions of 25-and 30-bp chromatin. In low salt, molecules are monomeric and homogeneously distributed in solution, whereas in high salt they separate into dense and dilute phases. In low-salt conditions, we could readily identify nucleosomes and trace their connectivity in individual chromatin fibers in cryo-ET tomograms (Fig. 1F, fig. S1, and movies S1 and S2). We first examined how increasing salt affects the structure of individual nucleosome arrays. Numerous studies have shown that salt causes compaction and oligomerization of chromatin fibers (73–79), although most studies have not revealed the underlying structural details [but see (80) and (81) for recent exceptions]. For each traced fiber, we measured the distance between the centers of mass, D, and the dihedral angle between planes, para, for all pairs of nucleosomes N and N + 2 (N represents sequential position). We also measured the dihedral angle between the planes of adjacent (N, N + 1) nucleosomes, α (fig. S2, A to D). To assist in visualizing these geometric features, in each system and condition we reconstructed an average dinucleosome and then combined two such pairs to build an average trinucleosome model (fig. S2E), shown in Fig. 1, G and H. In low salt, the 25-and 30-bp chromatin have similarly large values of D (fig. S2D), indicating that semiadjacent nucleosomes are splayed apart from one other; para values are ~45° in both cases. The average α angle for the two arrays differs by nearly 180° (α is ~230° and 50°, for 25 and 30 bp, respectively; fig. S2B), reflecting the difference in phasing of successive nucleosomes imparted by the 10-bp per turn helical pitch of the linker DNA. Because of this difference, in 25-bp chromatin, the N and N + 2 nucleosomes face away from each other (Fig. 1G, left), whereas in 30-bp chromatin they face toward each other (Fig. 1H, left). Increased salt reduces long-range electrostatic repulsion in the chromatin DNA (77), rearranging and compacting the arrays (fig. S1D). In both types, D decreases appreciably (fig. S2D), as does para (fig. S2C). In the 25-bp chromatin, nucleosomes N and N + 2 remain unstacked, with their faces exposed to solvent (Fig. 1G), and become roughly parallel to the intervening N + 1 nucleosome, as shown by the decrease in α (to ~200°, Fig. 1, G and I, and fig. S2B). The changes to D and para are larger in the 30-bp chromatin, owing to face-to-face stacking of the N and N + 2 nucleosomes, which become oriented approximately perpendicular to the N + 1 nucleosome (Fig. 1, H and I), as indicated by the large increase in α (to ~80°; fig. S2B), similar to observations on a 40-bp tetranucleosome arrays (81). These changes result in greater compaction of 30-bp chromatin than 25-bp chromatin (fig. S2F). Intranucleosome stacking in 30-bp chromatin has been predicted by multiple computer simulations (82–84) and observed in crystal structures (85) and single-particle cryo–electron microscopy reconstructions (86) of arrays with linkers of 20, 30, or 40 bp (fig. S2G). Computational studies suggest that this conformation is stabilized by face-to-face nucleosome contacts, which are the most energetically favorable nucleosome packing geometries, followed by face-to-side and side-toside (83, 87).

geometric centers to their experimental positions in low (Fig. 2, A and B) and high salt (Fig. 2, C and D). The simulations generate structural ensembles of the histone tails, revealing the probabilities of different histone tail conformational states. We quantified the number of intraand internucleosome contacts mediated by each tail (fig. S3A). This analysis identifies the most frequent interactions within nucleosome pairs arranged according to the cryo-ET data. Although interaction statistics do not directly report on energies, our analyses show that the most frequent tail interactions arise from energetically favorable pairs—lysines and arginines contacting negatively charged histone residues and DNA (fig. S3B). The simulations show that in low salt, the histone tails in both chromatin types make almost exclusively intranucleosome interactions with DNA (Fig. 2, A and B, and fig. S3, C and D). In high salt, the tails partially release from their own nucleosomes (fig. S3C) and instead contact the DNA and histones of neighbors (Fig. 2, C to E, and fig. S3C). The nature of these interactions is governed by the conformation of the fiber and by the location of each tail on the nucleosome core: H4 and H2A(N) emerge from the nucleosome face, whereas H3 and H2B extend from the nucleosome edge (Fig. 2, C and D, and fig. S3E). The cryo-ET data show that in high salt, 25-bp arrays in the dilute phase adopt diverse conformations, with nucleosomes displaying a broad range of distances and orientations relative to their neighbors (figs. S1D and S2, B to D). In the simulations, this range of internucleosome con figurations coincides with heterogeneous interactions involving principally histone H2A, H3, and H4 tails (Fig. 2, C, E, F, and H). This heterogeneity is evident in the larger variance in contacts per residue compared to 30-bp arrays (Fig. 2H). The H3 tail is ideally positioned for face-to-side and side-to-side nucleosome contacts, whereas the H4 and H2A(N) tails facilitate face-to-side interactions and, less frequently, face-to-face contacts (Fig. 2C). Consistent with the diverse tail behaviors of 25-bp chromatin, simulations indicate that the free energy landscape of a 25-bp tetranucleosome is characterized by multiple competing low-lying minima (90). The 30-bp arrays are different in that the prevalence of intramolecular face-to-face stacking decreases the heterogeneity of tail interactions (reducing their standard deviations in Fig. 2H) and amplifies the contributions of the H4 and H2A(N) tails, whose positions facilitate stabilization of face-to-face stacking (Fig. 2, D and E, and fig. S3E). The H3 and H2B tails are less involved owing to their peripheral locations. The H4 and H2A(N) tails make appreciably more internucleosome contacts in 30-bp chromatin than in 25-bp chromatin (Fig. 2, G and H). The region in H4 from K16 to R19 makes the highest number of contacts (Fig. 2H and S4A), which is in agreement with observed decompaction of chromatin upon H4K16 acetylation or mutation of these residues (91–93). Residues in and adjacent to the H2A and H2B acidic patch (H2A residues Y57, E61, E64, L65, N68, R71, D72, and N89 to E92; H2B residues E102 and E110 plus L42 to D47) formed more interactions in 30-bp chromatin compared with 25-bp chromatin (Fig. 2, F to H), primarily because of interactions with the H4-tail basic patch (94–97) (Single-letter abbreviations for the amino acid residues are as follows: D, Asp; E, Glu; K, Lys; L, Leu; N, Asn; R, Arg; Y, Tyr). The histone tail contact distributions of 25-and 30-bp chromatin are consistent with reported biochemical studies of chromatin compaction (tables S2 and S3). Previous simulations performed without experimental restraints have also revealed that histone tail contacts are dependent on solution conditions, linker DNA length, and internucleosome orientations (84, 98–100), as observed here. Our combined data and simulations show that increased salt concentration drives compaction of nucleosome arrays concomitant with formation of many new internucleosome contacts. For 25-bp chromatin, DNA geometry and diverse contacts of the H3, H4, and H2A(N) histone tails produce heterogeneous structures with many nucleosome faces exposed to solvent. By contrast, for 30-bp chromatin, DNA

[Page 5]

25-bp Low Salt

30-bp Low Salt

25-bp High Salt

30-bp High Salt

Face-to-Side

Face-to-Face

H3 H2A(N)

H2B

H3

H4

H2B

H4 H2B

H3

H2A(N)

Cmax25 =0.6

Cmax30 =0.6

H4

H2A Inter-nucleosome

Cmin30 =0

Average Contacts per Tail/ Residue per Simulation Frame

Cmin25 =0

H3

H4

H2A(N)

H2B Arginines Lysines

Histone Tail Residue Number

25med, dil, H4TL

Rg (nm)

25med, dil, WT

id -S

ac

Si

de

-to

ce

-to ce Fa

Fa

4T

ed

ed

il,

il,

4T il,

ed

ed

30med, dil, H4TL

30med, dil, WT

il,

25med, dil, WT 25med, dil, H4TL 30med, dil, WT 30med, dil, H4TL

id

-S

-to

cryo-ET structure

Number of Interactions

Fig. 2. Different histone tail interactions in 25-and 30-bp chromatin in the dilute phase. (A and B) Schematic representations 25-bp (A) and 30-bp (B) chromatin arrays in low salt derived from cryo-ET and computationally extended to the chemical-specific model. DNA beads are represented in dark gray (A) and dark blue (B); histone protein beads are in light gray (A) and light blue (B). (C and D) As shown in (A) and (B) for chromatin in high salt. DNA beads are dark pink (C) and dark green (D); histone protein beads are light pink (C) and light green (D). (Insets) A pair of nucleosomes interacting face-to-side (C) and face-to-face (D) via histone tails. Histone core beads are white and DNA beads are light gray. Histone tail beads are colored as follows: H3, green; H4, blue; H2A(N) terminal, red; and H2B, cyan. (E) Schematic representation of internucleosome histone tail interactions. (F and G). Representative structures of a nucleosome from 25-(F) and 30-bp (G) chromatin simulations, illustrating average contact frequency of each residue; histone core and tails are indicated by larger and smaller beads, respectively. Residues are color-coded by the total number of internucleosome contacts (averaged over

[Page 6]

400 simulation frames; see table S1 for n) made by each amino acid in histones [H3, H4, H2A(N), and H2B] of one nucleosome with DNA (nucleosomal and linker) and histones (core and tails) of neighboring nucleosomes. Acidic patch in (G) indicated by dashed orange oval. (H) Internucleosome contacts (average per residue per simulation frame) made by each amino acid in the histone of one nucleosome and the DNA and histones of neighboring nucleosomes [simulation details provided in (F) and (G) legend above; 25-bp fibers, pink; 30-bp fibers, green]. Blue, cyan, and orange vertical lines show positions of lysines, arginines, and acidic patch residues, respectively. Shading indicates standard deviation from the mean. (I) Representative nucleosome arrays assigned in cryo-ET tomograms of 25-and 30-bp arrays (medium salt, dilute phase) assembled with either wild-type (WT) histone octamers (25med,dil,WT and 30med,dil,WT) or H4 tail deletion octamers (25med,dil,H4TL and 30med,dil,H4TL). (J) Radius of gyration (Rg) of indicated nucleosome arrays. (K) Intramolecular interactions per 12-mer array, classified as face-to-face, face-to-side, and side-to-side.

geometry and interactions of histone H4 and H2A(N) tails favor intramolecular stacking of nucleosomes. As described below, these differences in configuration strongly influence the ability of molecules to interact with neighbors, with important consequences on phase separation and condensate material properties.

Histone H4 tail deletion differentially affects 25-and 30-bp chromatin conformations

25-and 30-bp chromatin form distinct molecular structures in the condensates

270°

Class 1

Class 2

Class 3

Overlaid

45°

24%

76%

Class 1 Class 2 Overlaid We next examined the structure of chromatin in the condensed phase. Using context-aware template matching (CATM) algorithms (103), we placed and Fig. 3. Molecular structures of 25-and 30-bp chromatin in the condensed phase. (A) Cross section of a oriented the nucleosomes for both 25-and 30-bp chromatin condensate in denoised cryo-ET tomogram (left, scale bar 100 nm; middle, magnified view with chromatin condensates (Fig. 3, A and E, and movies scale bar 20 nm). Right panel shows nucleosome model assignments from densities in the center panel (scale S3 to S5). Nearly random orientation distributions bar, 20 nm). (B) Nucleosome structure (8.0-Å resolution) from 25-bp chromatin obtained by subtomogram with respect to the imaging axis in both cases indicate averaging 104,438 particles in 10 tomograms. Density is shown as gray surface; fitted model (PDB: 6pwe) is that sample integrity was preserved and nucleosomes shown as red and green ribbons. (C and D) Classification of mono-and dinucleosome structures in 25-bp were properly assigned (fig. S5A) (103). Subtomogram chromatin. Classes are colored differently. (E) Overview of 30-bp chromatin condensate, analogous to that averaging resulted in nucleosome structures with shown in (A). (F) Nucleosome structure (5.8-Å resolution) from 30-bp chromatin obtained by subtomogram 8-and 5.8-Å resolution for 25-and 30-bp chromatin, averaging 111,909 particles in 10 tomograms. Density is shown as gray surface; fitted model (PDB: 6L4A) is respectively (fig. S5, B to D, and table S4), further shown as red and green ribbons. (G) Classification of mono-and trinucleosome structures in 30-bp chromatin. supporting the accuracy of nucleosome positions Classes are colored differently and are highly overlapping. (H) Two classes of trinucleosome structures in 30-bp chromatin. (I) Structural modeling of a tetranucleosome in 30-bp chromatin. Density is shown as gray and orientations. During refinement, nucleosomes in 25-bp chro- surface; four fitted individual mononucleosome models (PDB: 6pwe) are shown as red and green spheres. matin showed only one linker DNA segment emerging from the core particle (Fig. 3B). Subclassification yielded a panel of structures with distinct orientations of the second (Fig. 3D). This flexibility prevented subtomogram averaging of trinulinker when aligned based on the first (Fig. 3C). These orientations cleosomes or more complex structures. The flexibility of both indidiffered in DNA crossing angle at the nucleosome dyad (Fig. 3C, top) vidual nucleosomes and nucleosome pairs is likely related to the and in deviations out of the nucleosome plane (Fig. 3C, bottom), simi- reported importance of nucleosome breathing and DNA twisting for lar to mononucleosomes analyzed in high salt (104). In further recon- efficient chromatin phase separation (57, 88). structions of 25-bp dinucleosomes, adjacent nucleosomes adopted The 30-bp chromatin behaves differently (Fig. 3E). Mononucleosomes different conformations, with varying twist angles (α) between them in 30-bp chromatin condensates could be refined to high resolution

To test the predicted differential contributions of the H4 tail to the 25-and 30-bp chromatin structures, we assembled both array types with octamers lacking the H4 tail and determined their structures in 60 mM potassium acetate buffer, using cryo-ET (Fig. 2, I to K, and fig. S4, B to D). Deleting the H4 tail increased radius of gyration (Rg) and distance D more for 30-bp arrays than for 25-bp arrays. More over, face-to-face interactions of 30-bp arrays were substantially decreased along with dihedral angle para, with little change in these parameters for 25-bp arrays. Essentially, the helical fiber formed by wildtype 30-bp chromatin is abolished by H4 tail deletion, whereas the structure of 25-bp chromatin is only modestly changed. These results are consistent with previous reports of 10N array decompaction upon histone H4 tail deletion (93, 101, 102) and with our computational predictions that the H4 tail is more important to 30-bp chromatin structure than to 25-bp chromatin structure.

[Page 7]

with two linker DNA segments clearly observable (Fig. 3, F and G). These segments have a crossing angle of 57°, similar to that observed in cryoEM reconstructions of mononucleosomes (Fig. 3F, G) (105, 106). We could also reconstruct trinucleosome (two conformers, Fig. 3H) and tetranucleosome structures (but not larger), the latter with additional partial nucleosome densities surrounding it (Fig. 3I). Both assemblies show pairs of stacked, alternating nucleosomes (N:N + 2), oriented approximately orthogonally to the other nucleosome (s). Our data suggest that the tetranucleosome is the largest well-ordered element in the 30-bp dodecameric arrays within condensates. Overall, within the condensates, 25-bp chromatin adopts more diverse configurations, whereas 30-bp chromatin is more constrained and stereotypical. This is true for individual nucleosomes and for larger groupings within a fiber. As in the dilute phase, the 30-bp chromatin makes numerous intramolecular face-to-face stacking interactions, which are not frequently observed in the 25-bp chromatin.

Balance of intra-and intermolecular interactions determines condensate stability

To translate molecular features of 25-and 30-bp chromatin to phase separation behaviors of the two molecules, we next compared the organization of nucleosomes and nucleosome arrays on larger scales. The radial distribution function, g(r), of nucleosomes in 25-bp chromatin is broad and only modestly different from a random distribution, whereas that of 30-bp chromatin shows distinct peaks indicating face-to-face stacking (Fig. 4A). Similarly, the distribution of angles between the planes of nearest neighbor nucleosomes in 25-bp chromatin deviates only modestly from a random (sinusoidal) distribution (103) (Fig. 4B). By contrast, nucleosomes in 30-bp condensates show a strong preference for low angles (~parallel geometry), with a maximum at ~15° and substantial depletion for angles >~45° (Fig. 4B). Together, the data are consistent with an abundance of face-to-face stacking in 30-bp condensates and more-heterogeneous orientations in 25-bp condensates. To understand how pairwise nucleosome packing generates interactions between arrays, we next sought to connect the assigned nucleosomes into molecular units (fig. S5, E to J, and movies S4 and S5). Ambiguities in nucleosome positions and orientations and weak linker DNA density made it slow and laborious to connect nucleosomes into arrays. Never theless, we did connect 10 groups of more than eight nucleosomes into molecular units in the 25-and 30-bp condensates. For each molecule, we also identified all surrounding nucleosomes (Fig. 4, C and D). As illustrated in Fig. 4C and fig. S6, A and B, within condensates, 25-bp nucleosome arrays are relatively expanded, with an average Rg of 18.2 ± 1.3 nm. The molecules adopt numerous, irregular conformations. By contrast, the 30-bp arrays are compact, with average Rg of 13.9 ± 0.9 nm, and composed mostly of groups of four to six nucleosomes organized into two-start helices, with nucleosomes N and N + 2 stacked face-to-face (Fig. 4D and fig. S6, C and D). For both chromatin types, the structures observed within the condensates have similar values and distributions of Rg, α, D, and para to those observed in the dilute phase under the same solution conditions (fig. S6, B, and E to G), suggesting that phase separation may not strongly affect the conformation and flexibility of individual molecules. One caveat is that molecules recently dissociated from the condensate and captured by freezing proximal to the liquid-liquid interface may not have relaxed to their equilibrium dilute-phase configurations. The differences in molecular conformation produce starkly different patterns of intra-and intermolecular interactions for the two chromatin types (Fig. 4, C and D). Because of their extension and nucleosome arrangements, 25-bp arrays show few intramolecular contacts and many intermolecular contacts (Fig. 4C). This behavior is inverted for 30-bp arrays, which make approximately twice as many intramolecular contacts as 25-bp arrays and ~30% fewer intermolecular contacts than 25-bp arrays. The types of intermolecular interactions made by the

two systems are also different (Fig. 4E). The 25-bp arrays make a much larger fraction of the most energetically favorable contacts (face-toface ) than the 30-bp arrays, which show a larger fraction of weaker contacts (face-to-side and side-to-side) (83, 87) (Fig. 4F). Thus, within condensates, 25-bp chromatin molecules make a larger number of intermolecular contacts, with more energetically favorable geometries, compared with 30-bp chromatin molecules. These differences suggest a greater enthalpic gain upon condensate formation for 25-bp chromatin. To examine histone tail contacts within the condensates, we simulated clusters of arrays surrounding a molecule similar in conformation to one found in the cryo-ET tomograms (Fig. 4, G and H, fig. S7, and table S1) and quantified contacts of the histone tails of the central molecule (Fig. 4I). Paralleling the nucleosome contacts observed in the cryo-ET tomograms (Fig. 4E), the simulations revealed that in 25-bp condensates, histone tails make more interarray than intra-array contacts (Fig. 4I). By contrast, again in agreement with the cryo-ET data (Fig. 4E), most histone tail interactions in 30-bp condensates are intra-array (Fig. 4I). In 25-bp condensates, chromatin fibers interact frequently via their H4 and H2A(N) tails (Fig. 4I), which is consistent with the prevalence of interarray face-to-face stacking (Figs. 3A and 4, F and G). Conversely, within 30-bp condensates, the H4 and H2A(N) tails make many fewer interarray contacts (Fig. 4I). This results in a relatively flat distribution of interarray contacts across the four tails for the 30-bp chromatin. Notably, the pattern of interarray contacts in 25-bp chromatin resembles that of intra-array contacts in 30-bp chromatin [dominant H4 and H2A(N)] because both are enriched in nucleosome face-to-face stacking. However, H2B interactions are numerous in the former but nearly absent in the latter. This difference arises because antiparallel stacking in 25-bp chromatin positions the H2B tail in contact with the entry and exit DNA of the neighboring nucleosome, whereas parallel stacking in 30-bp chromatin positions it more peripherally. Thus, analogous to single fibers (Fig. 2), intermolecular contacts of histone tails in condensates are determined by a combination of fiber conformation and tail position within the nucleosome. As described in tables S5 and S6, the patterns of tail interactions observed here are generally consistent with previous biochemical studies of tail contributions to chromatin oligomerization, with the caveat that for 30-bp chromatin, perturbations disrupting nucleosome stacking will affect both oligomerization and the conformation of individual arrays. Histone tail acetylation is associated with increasing chromatin accessibility in cells and can dissolve chromatin condensates in vitro (33). To investigate how acetylation influences chromatin packing, we treated 30-bp chromatin with p300 histone acetyltransferase and captured temporal snapshots using cryo-ET. Unmodified 30-bp chromatin condensates have virtually no pores larger than 14 nm (fig. S8, A and D). Upon acetylation, larger pores emerge (fig. S8, B to D) and overall nucleosome density decreases (fig. S8E). Pore number and size increase with the duration of acetylation, with some large enough to accommodate macromolecular complexes such as RNA polymerase II—15 nm versus pores as large as 20 to 25 nm. The changes in density and pore size distribution coincide with loss of face-to-face nucleosome packing interactions, indicating disruption of the helical structure of individual arrays (fig. S8, F and G). These observations indicate that acetylation can disrupt local chromatin fiber structure and may induce the formation of physical voids within cellular chromatin, providing a structural mechanism that could facilitate transcriptional activation by enhancing accessibility. These data lead to a model in which linker length determines the conformation of chromatin molecules, which in turn determines the balance between intra-and intermolecular contacts as well as the energetic strength of those contacts. These contacts then define the thermodynamic stability of their condensates. Twenty-five –base pair chromatin adopts conformations favoring strong and numerous intermolecular interactions, producing more stable condensates. Thirty– base pair chromatin adopts conformations that allow weaker and

[Page 8]

Fraction

g(r)

random

15 30 45 60 75 90

Angle

Radius (nm)

Number of Interactions

25-bp interaction cluster (17 arrays)

30-bp interaction cluster (12 arrays)

in

in

tr

te

ra

ar

rr

ra

ay

Number of interarray interactions

Interarray Face-to-Face

Interarray Side-to-Side

id

id Si

de

-to

-S

-S -to

ce

ce Fa

Fa

-to

ac

H3

H4

H2A(N)

H2B

Intra-array

Interarray

Average Contacts per Tail/ Residue per Simulation Frame

Arginines Lysines

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 5

10 15 20 25 5

10 15 20

Histone Tail Residue Number

10 15 20 25 30 35 40

Fig. 4. Linker length determines balance of intra-and intermolecular interactions in the condensed phase. (A) Radial distribution functions, g(r), of 25-bp (magenta) chromatin, 30-bp (green) chromatin, and a bath of randomly oriented nucleosomes at equivalent density (gray). Peaks at 6, ~12, and ~16 nm in 30-bp chromatin reflect pairwise and higher-order nucleosome stacking. (B) Distributions of nearest dinucleosome orientations for 25-bp (magenta) and 30-bp (green) chromatin. Zero and ninety degrees represent parallel and perpendicular orientations, respectively. (C and D) Representative manually traced individual nucleosome arrays [25-bp (magenta) in (C), 30-bp (green) in (D)] and their immediate neighboring nucleosomes (gray) within chromatin condensates. See fig. S5, E to J, and movies S4 and S5 for nucleosome tracing. (E) Intra and internucleosome interactions of 25-bp (magenta) and 30-bp (green) nucleosome arrays within chromatin condensates, Statistical analysis was performed with a t test; ****P < 0.0001, n = 11. (F) Intermolecular contacts between traced arrays and their immediate neighboring nucleosomes with face-to-face, face-to-side, and side-to-side geometries (25-bp, magenta; 30-bp, green). (G and H) Representative high-resolution snapshots of reconstructed clusters of chromatin arrays in the 25-bp [(G), magenta and orange] and 30-bp [(H), green and cyan] chromatin condensates. In each panel, the array most similar to a traced array in a cryo-ET tomogram (see materials and methods) is highlighted. All arrays interacting with this central array are shown, with one colored orange (25 bp) or cyan (30 bp). (Insets) Expanded images of the two interacting arrays, to show face-to-face (G) or side-to-side (H) interarray stacking. (I) Number of internucleosome contacts (average per residue per simulation frame) between histone tails of one nucleosome and the DNA and histones of a neighboring nucleosome (intra-array, top; interarray, bottom) within simulated clusters (25-bp, magenta; 30-bp, green; averaged over 400 simulation frames; see table S1.) The blue and cyan vertical lines show positions of lysines and arginines, respectively. Shading indicates 1 SD from the mean.

[Page 9]

Linker length determines connectivity of the condensate network

25-and 30-bp chromatin show distinct dynamics on mesoand molecular scales

The differences in affinity (likely reflecting differences in lifetime ) and density of bonds in 25-and 30-bp chromatin condensates suggested that the material properties of the two liquids might differ (5, 30, 107, 108). To test this idea on the mesoscale, we measured viscoelasticity of the condensates using passive microrheology with optical traps (pMOT)

25-bp, High connectivity

Optical trap lasers

1 μm bead

Trapped motion

Moduli (Pa)

chromatin condensate

G' 25-bp G" 25-bp

10-1

10-2 G' 30-bp G" 30-bp 10-3

10-1

10-1

10-2

10-1

Frequency (Hz)

Diffusion coefficient (μm2/sec

Frequency (Hz)

Nucleosome-Atto647N

10-2 10-2

Time (min)

Viscosity (Pa•s)

30-bp, Low connectivity

25-bp 30-bp

270°

270° 225°

225°

315° 0°

180°

315°

180°

0°

θ=0° 135°

θ=180°

45°

135°

25-bp AC = -1.325

45° 90°

90°

AC = -0.555

Fig. 5. Distinct dynamics of 25-and 30-bp chromatin condensate on molecular-and mesoscales. (A and B) Cross sections of interaction networks derived from coarse-grained simulations of 25-bp (A) and 30-bp (B) chromatin condensates. Node diameter is scaled by number of molecules contacted by each array; edge thickness is scaled by energy of association between each pair of molecules. (C) Normalized turbidity (absorption at 345 nm) of solutions containing chromatin droplets after introduction of trypsin. (D) Schematic illustrating passive microrheology with optical traps (pMOT): A 1-μm bead is optically trapped within chromatin condensate, and its trapped motion is tracked over time with a brightfield camera or quadrant photodetector. (E) Average elastic/storage (G′) and viscous/loss (G′′) moduli of 25-bp (magenta; n = 12) and 30-bp (green; n = 11) chromatin condensates. Representative individual plots are shown in fig. S11. Thick lines indicate average; thin lines represent standard error from the mean. (F) Viscosity of 25-bp (magenta; n = 12) and 30-bp (green; n = 11) chromatin condensates, calculated from G′′ data in (E); plotted as shown in (E). Thick lines, average; thin lines, standard error. (G) Schematic illustrating single-molecule tracking experiments. Sparse labeling of nucleosome arrays with Atto647N dye enables tracking of individual molecules. (H) Trajectories of single-nucleosome array in 25-bp (magenta) and 30-bp (green) chromatin condensates. Scale bar, 1 μm. (I) Diffusion coefficients calculated for nucleosome arrays in 25-bp (total 7670 trajectories) and 30-bp (total 3167 trajectories) chromatin condensates. (J) Schematic illustration of trajectory angular analysis, where the angle between every pair of steps in a single-molecule trajectory is measured. Zero degrees corresponds to directed motion and 180° indicates back-and-forth movement. (K) Trajectory angular analysis distributions for nucleosome arrays in 25-bp (left) and 30-bp (right) chromatin condensates. Asymmetry coefficient (AC) describes the ratio of forward to backward movement on a log2 scale.

We next used the minimal model coarsegrained simulations (see materials and methods) to relate the network of interactions between chromatin arrays to material properties of the condensates. We abstracted the simulations to graph networks where nodes and edges represent array molecules and interactions between them, respectively (Fig. 5, A and B, and fig. S9, A and B). Figure 5, A and B, shows cross sections through the centers of representative networks, generated by temporal snapshots of simulations of each chromatin type. The 25-bp network is more densely connected than the 30-bp network, as described quantitatively by the average number (fig. S9C) and strength (fig. S9, D and E) of pairwise interarray interactions and by normalized algebraic connectivity values of 0.88 ± 0.03 and 0.73 ± 0.05, respectively (on a scale of 0 to 1, where 0 indicates no connections and 1 indicates all nodes connected with the highest node degree in the 25-bp chromatin). To examine network connectivity biochemically, we treated the condensates with trypsin, which cleaves histone tails leading to dissolution (33) (Fig. 5C). Twentyfive –base pair condensates were more resistant than 30-bp condensates, which is consistent with greater histone tail– mediated connectivity. We also modeled this process by reducing the number of potential interactions between nucleosomes in simulations. We found that the size of the largest connected cluster of molecules decreased much faster for 30-bp chromatin than for 25-bp chromatin, aligning with the experimental results (fig. S9F). Thus, the differences in molecular interactions of 25-and 30-bp chromatin produce higher-order networks with different degrees of connectivity (movie S6).

Trypsin digestion

Normalized Turbidity

fewer intermolecular interactions (but more and stronger intramolecular interactions), producing less-stable condensates (movie S6).

[Page 10]

Together, the rheological and single-molecule data suggest that differences in network interactions arising from differences in linkerdependent molecular structure produce quantitative and qualitative differences in the dynamics of chromatin condensates spanning mesoto molecular scales (movie S6).

Native chromatin forms domains with nucleosome organization similar to 25-bp condensates

We investigated chromatin organization in vitrified HeLa cell nuclei and intact NIH 3T3 cells using cryo–focused ion beam milling and cryo-ET (Fig. 6, A to F). Each system had nuclear domains of high nu cleosome density, varying in size from ~100 to 300 nm, surrounded by regions of lower density. These structures, which were also reported in a recent cryo-ET study of T-lymphoblast CEM and RPE-1 nuclei (65, 70), are similar in size to domains of high-density DNA observed by superresolution fluorescence microscopy (49, 50). Staining for epigenetic marks suggested that those structures corresponded to inactive chromatin (50). Thus, the high-density domains we observe here may be in active chromatin as well. Radial distribution functions and overall density of nucleosomes in each native chromatin sample were similar to those of synthetic 25-bp chromatin condensates (Fig. 6G and fig. S13A). The orientation distribution and patterns of packing geometries of nearest nucleosome pairs were also similar for native chromatin and 25-bp chromatin condensates, showing modest deviations from a random distribution (Fig. 6, H and I, and fig. S14). Thus, at the level of individual nucleosomes, dense chromatin regions and 25-bp chromatin condensates have packing arrangements that deviate similarly from randomly organized molecules, likely reflecting geometric features of nucleosome interaction energies and restrictions imparted by DNA linkers. Inspection of the dense chromatin regions revealed some groups of nucleosomes stacked into two-start helices analogous to those in synthetic 30-bp chromatin condensates (but shorter; Fig. 6, B and E, and fig. S13, B to H). These may be formed by genomic regions with nucleosomes having ~10N spacing. These structures might be functionally important if recognized by specific factors or associated with specific loci. Overall, our data show that native chromatin from these cellular sources forms ~100-to 300-nm-scale dense domains composed mostly of nucleosomes that are packed nonrandomly and have an excess of contacts involving nucleosome faces, with occasional instances of twostart helical fibers.

Discussion

Our studies of chromatin illustrate the types of information that may be gained from future cryo-ET studies of other biomolecular condensates composed of large, electron-dense units. Comparison of dilutephase structures above and below the phase separation threshold can reveal conformational changes that drive assembly. Subtomogram averaging can afford medium resolution structures of individual particles in the dense and dilute phases. For multivalent systems, it may be possible to reconstruct higher-order units of the core particle (e.g., multinucleosome groupings; Fig. 3). It may also be possible to observe and reconstruct client molecules that bind the phase-separating scaffold molecules. At a higher level, one can visualize the spatial arrangement of components on nano-to micrometer-length scales. Such analyses will reveal local packing interactions (distances, geometries, pore sizes; energetics, when coupled with modeling), which inform on the drive to phase separate. On longer scales, network architecture, when coupled with dynamics measurements, will inform on viscoelasticity. Comparison of molecular organization in the core and surface of a condensate can provide a structural explanation for surface tension (103) and potentially surface chemistry. Future developments in the representation and analyses of molecules within condensates should yield additional information and insights beyond those considered here.

(Fig. 5D). The optically trapped beads move less in 25-bp condensates than in 30-bp condensates (fig. S10, A to D). Analysis of the trajectories yields the viscoelastic modulus (G*), composed of viscous (G′′) and elastic (G′) moduli (Fig. 5E, and fig. S10, E to N). The 25-bp chromatin condensates have higher G′ and G′′ than 30-bp condensates in all measured frequency regimes. Moreover, whereas viscous behavior is dominant (G′′ > G′) on all timescales for 30-bp condensates, the viscous and elastic moduli intersect at ~0.1 Hz and again at ~5 Hz for 25-bp condensates. Between these frequencies, elastic behavior is dominant (G′ > G′′). pMOT measurements with a fast detector revealed a shallow crossover between G′ and G′′ for the 30-bp condensates only at very high frequencies, ~103 Hz (fig. S10, K and L). Viscoelastic moduli determined by analyses of Brownian motion of fluorescent beads in the condensates showed analogous behaviors (fig. S11, movie S7, and table S7). The pMOT data yielded zero-shear viscosity for 25-bp condensates approximately 40 times higher than that of 30-bp condensates (Fig. 5F). In cryo-ET tomograms, the 25-and 30-bp condensates have comparable nucleosome densities, suggesting that the different material properties likely arise from differences in molecular interaction networks rather than nucleosome density (fig. S12A). We used two approaches to computationally examine the viscoelastic behavior of the chromatin condensates. First, we analyzed the trajectories of the coarse-grained simulations to extract the shear stress relaxation modulus, G(t) (30), which reveals not only the differential material properties of 25-versus 30-bp condensates (Fig. S12B) but also how these changes are governed by distinct chromatin relaxation mechanisms. At short timescales (high frequencies), G(t) is nearly identical for both 25-and 30-bp systems. This similarity stems from the short-time behavior being primarily dictated by fast local processes, including intramolecular bond and angle relaxations. By contrast, at long timescales, the 25-bp system consistently exhibits a higher stress relaxation modulus than the 30-bp system. This difference arises because long-time behavior is dominated by slower, collective mechanisms—such as the formation and rupture of nucleosome-nucleosome interactions, large-scale conformational rearrangements of molecules, and diffusion of entire chromatin arrays. These relaxation processes are considerably hindered in the 25-bp condensates because of the stronger chromatin-chromatin interactions, resulting in a more elastic mechanical response at long times. We next used a recently described formalism to model G′and G′′, which is based on the interaction network observed in the simulations (5). We found that the differences in connectivity between the 25-and 30-bp condensates were insufficient to account for their different material properties (fig. S12, C to E). However, differences in interaction strength (likely reflecting longer-lived interactions, accounted for through the polymer friction coefficient in the model) did produce the qualitative differences observed in the data (fig. S12F). Thus, within the limitations of the formalism (fig. S10 legend), the modeling suggests that the different intermolecular affinities dominantly account for the differences in viscoelasticity between the two chromatin condensate types. We also examined dynamics of the condensates on molecular scales by imaging individual dye-labeled array molecules (Fig. 5G and movie S8). Single 25-bp arrays exhibited slower dynamics than 30-bp arrays, with diffusion coefficients of 0.024 ± 0.0002 μm2/s and 0.036 ± 0.0002 μm2/s, respectively (Fig. 5, H and I). Additionally, the distribution of jump angles between two consecutive translocations in the trajectories (Fig. 5J) was substantially biased toward 180° for 25-bp arrays compared with 30-bp arrays, indicating less random and more confined dynamics (Fig. 5K). Notably, the calculated asymmetry coefficient (AC)—which describes the ratio of forward to backward movement on a log2 scale —of 25-bp arrays is similar to that previously reported for single-nucleosome dynamics in live cells [−1.33 versus −1.36 (109)]. Thus, chromatin motions are more constrained in 25-bp condensates than in 30-bp condensates.

[Page 11]

(110–113). Viscoelasticity will dictate the length-and timescales at which internal processes will be affected by the condensate solution environment and how the condensate will respond to mechanical forces (114–116). Structures will provide a framework to understand the physical properties of the compartment, such as pH, ion concentrations (15, 117), and hydrophobicity (14, 118). Lastly, condensate structural analyses should explain how 100 nm disease-causing mutations alter both molecular and higher-order organization to produce functional defects (119). These types of analyses will be most applicable to biochemically reconstituted systems where all components are known, but nevertheless they can also be applied in cells when certain components are large and stereotypical. A long-standing question in the chromatin field is how the one-dimensional (1D) arrangement of nucleosomes along a DNA strand dictates the higher-order organization of the strands to produce a 3D architecture. Numerous studies have shown that 10N–base pair nucleosome spacing produces more compact fibers (85, 86, 120), whereas 10N + 5 spacing fa cilitates higher-order assembly (33, 83). Our cryo-ET data and simulations explain these findings in structural detail. They reveal how differences in nucleosome spacing produce distinct fiber conformaG tions with different histone tail interac1.0 tions. These conformational differences Side-to-Side then determine the balance between intra- Face-to-Side and intermolecular contacts, dictating the drive for higher-order assembly as Face-to-Face well as the material properties of the con0.2 Random densed states. As a step toward connecting HeLa nuclei this structural information to function, 0 15 30 45 60 75 90 NIH 3T3 cells we also show that weakening histone tail Angle (degree) interactions through acetylation alters Radius (nm) the pore size distribution within condensed chromatin, which is likely important to Fig. 6. Native chromatin forms discrete domains organized similarly to 25-bp chromatin condensates. (A to F) Tomographic acetylation-dependent processes such slices and 3D reconstructions illustrating nuclear nucleosome organization. [(A) to (C)] Overview slice (scale bar, 100 nm), as transcription and DNA repair. Future expanded regions (scale bar, 20 nm), and 3D nucleosome model assignments from a purified HeLa cell nucleus. [(D) to (F)] studies examining 1D to 3D relationships Analogous images from the nucleus of an intact NIH 3T3 cell. (B) and (E) are not expansions of regions from (A) and (D) in chromatin containing other regulatory but are derived from different planes of the tomograms. Different colors in (C) and (F) represent distinct chromatin posttranslational modifications could nanodomains by manual segmentation. (G) Radial distribution functions, g(r), for randomly oriented nucleosomes (gray), yield general principles regarding how nucleosomes in 25-bp chromatin condensates (magenta), purified HeLa cell nuclei (cyan), and nuclei of intact NIH 3T3 different compartments of chromatin are cells (black). (H) Distributions of nearest dinucleosome orientations for 25-bp chromatin condensates (magenta), purified formed and function. HeLa cell nuclei (cyan), and nuclei of intact NIH 3T3 cells (black). Zero and ninety degrees indicate parallel and Cryo-ET images here and elsewhere perpendicular orientations, respectively. (I) Fractions of face-to-face, face-to-side, and side-to-side pairwise nucleosome (65, 70) show that nuclear chromatin forms contacts in a random nucleosome distribution, 25-bp reconstituted chromatin condensates, nucleosomes in purified HeLa dense ~100-to 300-nm foci of concentrated cell nuclei, and nuclei of intact NIH 3T3 cells. nucleosomes, surrounded by regions of appreciably lower density. These foci and 25-bp chromatin condensates have simiThese features are relevant to diverse aspects of condensate func- lar nucleosome density and packing arrangements. It is possible that tion. Structures of individual particles within a condensate may pro- the foci form through microphase separation [phase separation of a small vide insight into activity changes that accompany phase separation. element of one or more chromosomes (121)], although other mechaPore sizes in the molecular network will be relevant to recruitment, nisms are also possible. It remains unclear how these foci relate to movement, and chemistry of other molecules within a condensate genome organization characterized by single-molecule imaging and

eL

IH

an

do nu m 3T cle 3 i ce lls

Fraction

Fraction

g(r)

[Page 12]

REFERENCES AND NOTES

P. Li et al., Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins. Nature 483, 336–340 (2012). doi: 10.1038/nature10879; pmid: 22398450 S. F. Banani, H. O. Lee, A. A. Hyman, M. K. Rosen, Biomolecular condensates: Organizers of cellular biochemistry. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 285–298 (2017). doi: 10.1038/ nrm.2017.7; pmid: 28225081 Y. Shin, C. P. Brangwynne, Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease. Science 357, eaaf4382 (2017). doi: 10.1126/science.aaf4382; pmid: 28935776 I. Alshareedah et al., Sequence-specific interactions determine viscoelasticity and aging dynamics of protein condensates. Nat. Phys. 20, 1482–1491 (2024). doi: 10.1038/ s41567-024-02558-1; pmid: 39464253 S. R. Cohen, P. R. Banerjee, R. V. Pappu, Direct computations of viscoelastic moduli of biomolecular condensates. J. Chem. Phys. 161, 095103 (2024). doi: 10.1063/5.0223001; pmid: 39225536 A. Chandrasekaran, K. Graham, J. C. Stachowiak, P. Rangamani, Kinetic trapping organizes actin filaments within liquid-like protein droplets. Nat. Commun. 15, 3139 (2024). doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-46726-6; pmid: 38605007 A. S. Lyon, W. B. Peeples, M. K. Rosen, A framework for understanding the functions of biomolecular condensates across scales. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 215–235 (2021). doi: 10.1038/s41580-020-00303-z; pmid: 33169001 D. L. J. Lafontaine, J. A. Riback, R. Bascetin, C. P. Brangwynne, The nucleolus as a multiphase liquid condensate. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 165–182 (2021). doi: 10.1038/ s41580-020-0272-6; pmid: 32873929 A. Yamasaki et al., Liquidity Is a Critical Determinant for Selective Autophagy of Protein Condensates. Mol. Cell 77, 1163–1175.e9 (2020). doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2019.12.026; pmid: 31995729 Z. Wang et al., Material properties of phase-separated TFEB condensates regulate the autophagy-lysosome pathway. J. Cell Biol. 221, e202112024 (2022). doi: 10.1083/ jcb.202112024; pmid: 35293953 P. Guo et al., PI4P-mediated solid-like Merlin condensates orchestrate Hippo pathway regulation. Science 385, eadf4478 (2024). doi: 10.1126/science.adf4478; pmid: 39116228 J. Risso-Ballester et al., A condensate-hardening drug blocks RSV replication in vivo. Nature 595, 596–599 (2021). doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03703-z; pmid: 34234347 L.-P. Bergeron-Sandoval et al., Endocytic proteins with prion-like domains form viscoelastic condensates that enable membrane remodeling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 118, e2113789118 (2021). doi: 10.1073/pnas.2113789118; pmid: 34887356 S. Ambadi Thody et al., Small-molecule properties define partitioning into biomolecular condensates. Nat. Chem. 16, 1794–1802 (2024). doi: 10.1038/s41557-024-01630-w; pmid: 39271915 M. R. King et al., Macromolecular condensation organizes nucleolar sub-phases to set up a pH gradient. Cell 187, 1889–1906.e24 (2024). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.029; pmid: 38503281 A. E. Posey et al., Biomolecular Condensates are Characterized by Interphase Electric Potentials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 28268–28281 (2024). doi: 10.1021/jacs.4c08946; pmid: 39356108 E. W. Martin, C. Iserman, B. Olety, D. M. Mitrea, I. A. Klein, Biomolecular Condensates as Novel Antiviral Targets. J. Mol. Biol. 436, 168380 (2024). doi: 10.1016/j. jmb.2023.168380; pmid: 38061626

18. D. M. Mitrea, M. Mittasch, B. F. Gomes, I. A. Klein, M. A. Murcko, Modulating biomolecular condensates: A novel approach to drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 21, 841–862 (2022). doi: 10.1038/s41573-022-00505-4; pmid: 35974095 19. T. H. Kim et al., Phospho-dependent phase separation of FMRP and CAPRIN1 recapitulates regulation of translation and deadenylation. Science 365, 825–829 (2019). doi: 10.1126/science.aax4240; pmid: 31439799 20. E. W. Martin et al., Valence and patterning of aromatic residues determine the phase behavior of prion-like domains. Science 367, 694–699 (2020). doi: 10.1126/ science.aaw8653; pmid: 32029630 21. A. C. Murthy et al., Molecular interactions underlying liquid-liquid phase separation of the FUS low-complexity domain. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 637–648 (2019). doi: 10.1038/ s41594-019-0250-x; pmid: 31270472 22. M. Bose, M. Lampe, J. Mahamid, A. Ephrussi, Liquid-to-solid phase transition of oskar ribonucleoprotein granules is essential for their function in Drosophila embryonic development. Cell 185, 1308–1324.e23 (2022). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2022.02.022; pmid: 35325593 23. M. Zhang et al., Molecular organization of the early stages of nucleosome phase separation visualized by cryo-electron tomography. Mol. Cell 82, 3000–3014.e9 (2022). pmid: 35907400 24. J. Guillén-Boixet et al., RNA-Induced Conformational Switching and Clustering of G3BP Drive Stress Granule Assembly by Condensation. Cell 181, 346–361.e17 (2020). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.049; pmid: 32302572 25. F. Tollervey et al., “Cryo-Electron Tomography of Reconstituted Biomolecular Condensates” in Phase-Separated Biomolecular Condensates: Methods and Protocols, H.-X. Zhou, J.-H. Spille, P. R. Banerjee, Eds. (Springer US, 2023), pp. 297–324. 26. X. Zhang et al., Molecular mechanisms of stress-induced reactivation in mumps virus condensates. Cell 186, 1877–1894.e27 (2023). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.03.015; pmid: 37116470 27. J. B. Woodruff et al., The Centrosome Is a Selective Condensate that Nucleates Microtubules by Concentrating Tubulin. Cell 169, 1066–1077.e10 (2017). doi: 10.1016/ j.cell.2017.05.028; pmid: 28575670 28. F. J. B. Bäuerlein et al., In Situ Architecture and Cellular Interactions of PolyQ Inclusions. Cell 171, 179–187.e10 (2017). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.08.009; pmid: 28890085 29. X. Liu, X. Xia, M. W. Martynowycz, T. Gonen, Z. H. Zhou, Molecular sociology of virus-induced cellular condensates supporting reovirus assembly and replication. Nat. Commun. 15, 10638 (2024). doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-54968-7; pmid: 39639006 30. A. R. Tejedor, R. Collepardo-Guevara, J. Ramírez, J. R. Espinosa, Time-Dependent Material Properties of Aging Biomolecular Condensates from Different Viscoelasticity Measurements in Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 127, 4441–4459 (2023). doi: 10.1021/acs.jpcb.3c01292; pmid: 37194953 31. A. R. Tejedor et al., Protein structural transitions critically transform the network connectivity and viscoelasticity of RNA-binding protein condensates but RNA can prevent it. Nat. Commun. 13, 5717 (2022). doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32874-0; pmid: 36175408 32. I. Sanchez-Burgos, J. A. Joseph, R. Collepardo-Guevara, J. R. Espinosa, Size conservation emerges spontaneously in biomolecular condensates formed by scaffolds and surfactant clients. Sci. Rep. 11, 15241 (2021). doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-94309-y; pmid: 34315935 33. B. A. Gibson et al., Organization of Chromatin by Intrinsic and Regulated Phase Separation. Cell 179, 470–484.e21 (2019). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.08.037; pmid: 31543265 34. M. W. G. Schneider et al., A mitotic chromatin phase transition prevents perforation by microtubules. Nature 609, 183–190 (2022). doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05027-y; pmid: 35922507 35. B. A. Gibson et al., In diverse conditions, intrinsic chromatin condensates have liquid-like material properties. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2218085120 (2023). doi: 10.1073/ pnas.2218085120; pmid: 37094140 36. M. Lakadamyali, M. P. Cosma, Visualizing the genome in high resolution challenges our textbook understanding. Nat. Methods 17, 371–379 (2020). doi: 10.1038/s41592-020- 0758-3; pmid: 32123395 37. A. G. Larson et al., Liquid droplet formation by HP1α suggests a role for phase separation in heterochromatin. Nature 547, 236–240 (2017). doi: 10.1038/nature22822; pmid: 28636604 38. A. R. Strom et al., Phase separation drives heterochromatin domain formation. Nature 547, 241–245 (2017). doi: 10.1038/nature22989; pmid: 28636597 39. I. Solovei et al., Nuclear architecture of rod photoreceptor cells adapts to vision in mammalian evolution. Cell 137, 356–368 (2009). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.01.052; pmid: 19379699 40. H. Belaghzal et al., Liquid chromatin Hi-C characterizes compartment-dependent chromatin interaction dynamics. Nat. Genet. 53, 367–378 (2021). doi: 10.1038/ s41588-021-00784-4; pmid: 33574602 41. J. Dekker, L. A. Mirny, The chromosome folding problem and how cells solve it. Cell 187, 6424–6450 (2024). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.10.026; pmid: 39547207

interaction-mapping technologies. The former have shown that small groups of 10 to 50 nucleosomes, termed clutches, assemble into discrete units (36). The latter have suggested that on a cell-population basis, genomic regions of 0.2 to 1 mega–base pairs (Mbp) associate into topologically associated domains (TADs) (36, 122, 123). Such large domains are not typically observed in interaction maps of individual cells sampled at single time points, where only subsets appear to associate (124–127). But the larger TADs may reflect cellular genome organization averaged over time. The foci we observed by cryo-ET have density of ~600,000 nucleosomes/μm3. Assuming an average nucleosome repeat length of 192 bp (128), this density corresponds to 115 Mbp/μm3. As a rough estimate, foci of ~100-to 300-nm diameter would contain 315 to 8500 nucleosomes and 60 kilo–base pairs to 1.6 Mbp of DNA. Thus, the foci are much larger than clutches and more consistent in size with TADs. It remains unknown how these foci, each of which represents only a tiny fraction of the human genome (<0.5%), relate to nuclear functions such as transcription and replication, among others. Future studies based on correlated light microscopy and electron microscopy—undertaken to understand epigenetic marks and perhaps genomic regions present in the foci—will be important for learning how these higher-order chromatin structures form and what their functions may be.

[Page 13]

68. V. I. Risca, S. K. Denny, A. F. Straight, W. J. Greenleaf, Variable chromatin structure revealed by in situ spatially correlated DNA cleavage mapping. Nature 541, 237–241 (2017). doi: 10.1038/nature20781; pmid: 28024297 69. S. Cai, D. Böck, M. Pilhofer, L. Gan, The in situ structures of mono-, di-, and trinucleosomes in human heterochromatin. Mol. Biol. Cell 29, 2450–2457 (2018). doi: 10.1091/mbc.E18-05-0331; pmid: 30091658 70. J. K. Chen et al., Nanoscale analysis of human G1 and metaphase chromatin in situ. EMBO J. 44, 2658–2694 (2025). doi: 10.1038/s44318-025-00407-2; pmid: 40097852 71. P. T. Lowary, J. Widom, New DNA sequence rules for high affinity binding to histone octamer and sequence-directed nucleosome positioning. J. Mol. Biol. 276, 19–42 (1998). doi: 10.1006/jmbi.1997.1494; pmid: 9514715 72. A. Flaus, Principles and practice of nucleosome positioning in vitro. Front. Life Sci. 5, 5–27 (2011). doi: 10.1080/21553769.2012.702667 73. F. Gordon, K. Luger, J. C. Hansen, The core histone N-terminal tail domains function independently and additively during salt-dependent oligomerization of nucleosomal arrays. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 33701–33706 (2005). doi: 10.1074/jbc.M507048200; pmid: 16033758 74. K. Maeshima et al., Nucleosomal arrays self-assemble into supramolecular globular structures lacking 30-nm fibers. EMBO J. 35, 1115–1132 (2016). doi: 10.15252/ embj.201592660; pmid: 27072995 75. J. C. Hansen, K. Maeshima, M. J. Hendzel, The solid and liquid states of chromatin. Epigenetics Chromatin 14, 50 (2021). doi: 10.1186/s13072-021-00424-5; pmid: 34717733 76. A. Allahverdi, Q. Chen, N. Korolev, L. Nordenskiöld, Chromatin compaction under mixed salt conditions: Opposite effects of sodium and potassium ions on nucleosome array folding. Sci. Rep. 5, 8512 (2015). doi: 10.1038/srep08512; pmid: 25688036 77. N. Korolev et al., Electrostatic origin of salt-induced nucleosome array compaction. Biophys. J. 99, 1896–1905 (2010). doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.07.017; pmid: 20858435 78. M. Kruithof et al., Single-molecule force spectroscopy reveals a highly compliant helical folding for the 30-nm chromatin fiber. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 534–540 (2009). doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1590; pmid: 19377481 79. J. Widom, Physicochemical studies of the folding of the 100 A nucleosome filament into the 300 A filament. Cation dependence. J. Mol. Biol. 190, 411–424 (1986). doi: 10.1016/ 0022-2836(86)90012-4; pmid: 3783706 80. N. Jentink, C. Purnell, B. Kable, M. T. Swulius, S. A. Grigoryev, Cryoelectron tomography reveals the multiplex anatomy of condensed native chromatin and its unfolding by histone citrullination. Mol. Cell 83, 3236–3252.e7 (2023). doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2023.08.017; pmid: 37683647 81. M. Zhang et al., Angle between DNA linker and nucleosome core particle regulates array compaction revealed by individual-particle cryo-electron tomography. Nat. Commun. 15, 4395 (2024). doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48305-1; pmid: 38782894 82. T. Nikitina, D. Norouzi, S. A. Grigoryev, V. B. Zhurkin, DNA topology in chromatin is defined by nucleosome spacing. Sci. Adv. 3, e1700957 (2017). doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1700957; pmid: 29098179 83. L. Chen et al., Nucleosome spacing can fine-tune higher-order chromatin assembly. Nat. Commun. 16, 6315 (2025). doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-61482-x; pmid: 40628730 84. H. Kenzaki, S. Takada, Linker DNA Length is a Key to Tri-nucleosome Folding. J. Mol. Biol. 433, 166792 (2021). doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2020.166792; pmid: 33383034 85. T. Schalch, S. Duda, D. F. Sargent, T. J. Richmond, X-ray structure of a tetranucleosome and its implications for the chromatin fibre. Nature 436, 138–141 (2005). doi: 10.1038/ nature03686; pmid: 16001076 86. F. Song et al., Cryo-EM study of the chromatin fiber reveals a double helix twisted by tetranucleosomal units. Science 344, 376–380 (2014). doi: 10.1126/science.1251413; pmid: 24763583 87. A. Golembeski, J. Lequieu, A Molecular View into the Structure and Dynamics of Phase-Separated Chromatin. J. Phys. Chem. B 128, 10593–10603 (2024). doi: 10.1021/ acs.jpcb.4c04420; pmid: 39413416 88. S. E. Farr, E. J. Woods, J. A. Joseph, A. Garaizar, R. Collepardo-Guevara, Nucleosome plasticity is a critical element of chromatin liquid-liquid phase separation and multivalent nucleosome interactions. Nat. Commun. 12, 2883 (2021). doi: 10.1038/s41467-021- 23090-3; pmid: 34001913 89. K. Russell et al., Near-atomistic simulations reveal the molecular principles that control chromatin structure and phase separation. bioRxiv 2025.11.17.688899 [Preprint] (2025). https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.11.17.688899. 90. Y. Qiu et al., Nucleosome condensate and linker DNA alter chromatin folding pathways and rates. bioRxiv 2024.11.15.623891 [Preprint] (2024). https://doi.org/10.1101/ 2024.11.15.623891. 91. P. J. J. Robinson et al., 30 nm chromatin fibre decompaction requires both H4-K16 acetylation and linker histone eviction. J. Mol. Biol. 381, 816–825 (2008). doi: 10.1016/ j.jmb.2008.04.050; pmid: 18653199 92. R. Collepardo-Guevara et al., Chromatin Unfolding by Epigenetic Modifications Explained by Dramatic Impairment of Internucleosome Interactions: A Multiscale Computational Study. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 10205–10215 (2015). doi: 10.1021/ jacs.5b04086; pmid: 26192632

42. R. R. Cheng et al., Exploring chromosomal structural heterogeneity across multiple cell lines. eLife 9, e60312 (2020). doi: 10.7554/eLife.60312; pmid: 33047670 43. Y. Itoh, E. J. Woods, K. Minami, K. Maeshima, R. Collepardo-Guevara, Liquid-like chromatin in the cell: What can we learn from imaging and computational modeling? Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 71, 123–135 (2021). doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2021.06.004; pmid: 34303931 44. K. Luger, A. W. Mäder, R. K. Richmond, D. F. Sargent, T. J. Richmond, Crystal structure of the nucleosome core particle at 2.8 A resolution. Nature 389, 251–260 (1997). doi: 10.1038/38444; pmid: 9305837 45. S. Pepenella, K. J. Murphy, J. J. Hayes, Intra-and inter-nucleosome interactions of the core histone tail domains in higher-order chromatin structure. Chromosoma 123, 3–13 (2014). doi: 10.1007/s00412-013-0435-8; pmid: 23996014 46. M. A. Ricci, C. Manzo, M. F. García-Parajo, M. Lakadamyali, M. P. Cosma, Chromatin Fibers Are Formed by Heterogeneous Groups of Nucleosomes In Vivo, Chromatin fibers are formed by heterogeneous groups of nucleosomes in vivo. Cell 160, 1145–1158 (2015). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.01.054; pmid: 25768910 47. M. Ohno et al., Sub-nucleosomal Genome Structure Reveals Distinct Nucleosome Folding Motifs. Cell 176, 520–534.e25 (2019). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.12.014; pmid: 30661750 48. H. D. Ou et al., ChromEMT: Visualizing 3D chromatin structure and compaction in interphase and mitotic cells. Science 357, eaag0025 (2017). doi: 10.1126/science. aag0025; pmid: 28751582 49. T. Nozaki et al., Dynamic Organization of Chromatin Domains Revealed by Super- Resolution Live-Cell Imaging. Mol. Cell 67, 282–293.e7 (2017). doi: 10.1016/ j.molcel.2017.06.018; pmid: 28712725 50. E. Miron et al., Chromatin arranges in chains of mesoscale domains with nanoscale functional topography independent of cohesin. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba8811 (2020). doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aba8811; pmid: 32967822 51. G. Pei, H. Lyons, P. Li, B. R. Sabari, Transcription regulation by biomolecular condensates. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 26, 213–236 (2025). doi: 10.1038/s41580-024-00789-x; pmid: 39516712 52. S. Brahmachari, S. Tripathi, J. N. Onuchic, H. Levine, Nucleosomes play a dual role in regulating transcription dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 121, e2319772121 (2024). doi: 10.1073/pnas.2319772121; pmid: 38968124 53. S. Sekine, H. Ehara, T. Kujirai, H. Kurumizaka, Structural perspectives on transcription in chromatin. Trends Cell Biol. 34, 211–224 (2023). doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2023.07.011; pmid: 37596139 54. A. E. Ehrenhofer-Murray, Chromatin dynamics at DNA replication, transcription and repair. Eur. J. Biochem. 271, 2335–2349 (2004). doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.2004.04162.x; pmid: 15182349 55. E. F. Hammonds et al., Histone H3 and H4 tails play an important role in nucleosome phase separation. Biophys. Chem. 283, 106767 (2022). doi: 10.1016/j.bpc.2022.106767; pmid: 35158124 56. X. Li, Z. An, W. Zhang, F. Li, Phase Separation: Direct and Indirect Driving Force for High-Order Chromatin Organization. Genes 14, 499 (2023). doi: 10.3390/ genes14020499; pmid: 36833426 57. S. Sanulli et al., HP1 reshapes nucleosome core to promote phase separation of heterochromatin. Nature 575, 390–394 (2019). doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1669-2; pmid: 31618757 58. H. Strickfaden et al., Condensed Chromatin Behaves like a Solid on the Mesoscale In Vitro and in Living Cells. Cell 183, 1772–1784.e13 (2020). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.027; pmid: 33326747 59. A. Shakya, S. Park, N. Rana, J. T. King, Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation of Histone Proteins in Cells: Role in Chromatin Organization. Biophys. J. 118, 753–764 (2020). doi: 10.1016/ j.bpj.2019.12.022; pmid: 31952807 60. Q. Chen et al., Chromatin Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation (LLPS) Is Regulated by Ionic Conditions and Fiber Length. Cells 11, 3145 (2022). doi: 10.3390/cells11193145; pmid: 36231107 61. T. Nozaki et al., Condensed but liquid-like domain organization of active chromatin regions in living human cells. Sci. Adv. 9, eadf1488 (2023). doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adf1488; pmid: 37018405 62. Y. Li, H. Zhang, X. Li, W. Wu, P. Zhu, Cryo-ET study from in vitro to in vivo revealed a general folding mode of chromatin with two-start helical architecture. Cell Rep. 42, 113134 (2023). doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113134; pmid: 37708029 63. A. J. Beel, M. Azubel, P.-J. Matteï, R. D. Kornberg, Structure of mitotic chromosomes. Mol. Cell 81, 4369–4376.e3 (2021). doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2021.08.020; pmid: 34520722 64. F. Fatmaoui et al., Cryo-electron tomography and deep learning denoising reveal native chromatin landscapes of interphase nuclei. bioRxiv 2022.08.16.502515 [Preprint] (2022). https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.08.16.502515. 65. Z. Hou, F. Nightingale, Y. Zhu, C. MacGregor-Chatwin, P. Zhang, Structure of native chromatin fibres revealed by Cryo-ET in situ. Nat. Commun. 14, 6324 (2023). doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-42072-1; pmid: 37816746 66. B. Bintu et al., Super-resolution chromatin tracing reveals domains and cooperative interactions in single cells. Science 362, eaau1783 (2018). doi: 10.1126/science.aau1783; pmid: 30361340 67. T.-H. S. Hsieh et al., Mapping Nucleosome Resolution Chromosome Folding in Yeast by Micro-C. Cell 162, 108–119 (2015). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.048; pmid: 26119342

[Page 14]

118. T. Wu et al., Single fluorogen imaging reveals distinct environmental and structural features of biomolecular condensates. Biophysics (2023). doi: 10.1101/ 2023.01.26.525727 119. C. Mathieu, R. V. Pappu, J. P. Taylor, Beyond aggregation: Pathological phase transitions in neurodegenerative disease. Science 370, 56–60 (2020). doi: 10.1126/science.abb8032; pmid: 33004511 120. P. J. J. Robinson, L. Fairall, V. A. T. Huynh, D. Rhodes, EM measurements define the dimensions of the “30-nm” chromatin fiber: Evidence for a compact, interdigitated structure. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 6506–6511 (2006). doi: 10.1073/ pnas.0601212103; pmid: 16617109 121. E. M. Hildebrand, J. Dekker, Mechanisms and Functions of Chromosome Compartmentalization. Trends Biochem. Sci. 45, 385–396 (2020). doi: 10.1016/ j.tibs.2020.01.002; pmid: 32311333 122. Q. Szabo et al., Regulation of single-cell genome organization into TADs and chromatin nanodomains. Nat. Genet. 52, 1151–1157 (2020). doi: 10.1038/s41588-020-00716-8; pmid: 33077913 123. J. Xu et al., A comprehensive benchmarking with interpretation and operational guidance for the hierarchy of topologically associating domains. Nat. Commun. 15, 4376 (2024). doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48593-7; pmid: 38782890 124. M. Hu, S. Wang, Chromatin Tracing: Imaging 3D Genome and Nucleome. Trends Cell Biol. 31, 5–8 (2021). doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2020.10.006; pmid: 33191055 125. S. Wang et al., Spatial organization of chromatin domains and compartments in single chromosomes. Science 353, 598–602 (2016). doi: 10.1126/science.aaf8084; pmid: 27445307 126. L. Tan, D. Xing, C.-H. Chang, H. Li, X. S. Xie, Three-dimensional genome structures of single diploid human cells. Science 361, 924–928 (2018). doi: 10.1126/science.aat5641; pmid: 30166492 127. T. J. Stevens et al., 3D structures of individual mammalian genomes studied by single-cell Hi-C. Nature 544, 59–64 (2017). doi: 10.1038/nature21429; pmid: 28289288 128. V. B. Teif et al., Nucleosome repositioning during differentiation of a human myeloid leukemia cell line. Nucleus 8, 188–204 (2017). doi: 10.1080/19491034.2017.1295201; pmid: 28406749 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dan. and Dav. Isenberg for their generous support of the MBL Chromatin Collaborative in honor of their father, I. Isenberg, and the other members of the Collaborative for critical insights and discussion. We thank S. Redding and C. Woodilla for assistance with and discussions regarding chromatin viscoelasticity experiments. We thank J. Iwasa for support and advice during early stages of visualizing chromatin condensates. Funding: This work was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (M.K.R., Z.Y., and E.V.); the Paul G. Allen Frontiers Distinguished Investigator Award (M.K.R.); the Welch Foundation I-1544 (M.K.R.); NIH grants R01AI163142 (A.S.) and 1R35GM141736 (M.K.R.); UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under the UK Government’s guarantee scheme (EP/Z002028/1), following funding by the European Research Council (ERC) Consolidator Grant under the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation program (R.C.-G.); the Cancer Research and Prevention Institute of Texas RP220582 (UTSW cryo-EM Facility, Structure Biology Lab); the NIH Common Fund Transformative High Resolution Cryo-Electron Microscopy program U24 GM129539 [National Center For In-Situ Tomographic Ultramicroscopy (NCITU)]; UKRI EPSRC EP/R029407/1 (R.C.-G.); the NIH Office of Research Infrastructure Program, S10OD030315 (A.S.); and the St. Jude Research Collaborative on the Biology and Biophysics of RNP Granules, CC11219 (B.A.G.). Author contributions: Conceptualization: H.Z., M.K.R.; Funding acquisition: A.S., E.V., R.C.-G., M.K.R.; Investigation: H.Z., J.H., M.J.M., K.R., J.H.H., R.Y., N.S., J.H., M.S., X.Z., L.K.D., B.A.G., J.R.E.; Methodology: H.Z., J.H., M.J.M., K.R., J.H.H., R.-W.Y., E.V., R.C.-G., M.K.R.; Project administration: Z.H., E.V., R.C.-G., M.K.R.; Supervision: A.S., E.V., R.C.-G., M.K.R.; Visualization: H.Z., J.H., M.R.; Writing – original draft: H.Z., M.K.R.; Writing – review & editing: All authors. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All cryo-ET data are deposited in the Dryad database (154). The subtomogram averages of nucleosome structures from the 25-and 30-bp chromatin condensates have been deposited in the EMDB under accession nos. EMD-70745 and EMD-70743, respectively. The CATM software and all cryo-ET analysis scripts are available on Zenodo (155). All simulation code has also been deposited in Zenodo (156). All reagents described in the work will be available by request to the corresponding authors. Vectors for production of the 25-and 30-bp chromatin arrays are available from Addgene under a Uniform Biological Material Transfer Agreement (UBMTA) with UT Southwestern exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original US government works. https://www.science.org/about/science-licenses-journal-articlereuse. This article is subject to HHMI’s Open Access to Publications policy. HHMI lab heads have previously granted a nonexclusive CC BY 4.0 license to the public and a sublicensable license to HHMI in their research articles. Pursuant to those licenses, the Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM) of this article can be made freely available under a CC BY 4.0 license immediately upon publication. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS science.org/doi/10.1126/science.adv6588 Materials and Methods; Figs. S1 to S14; Tables S1 to S7; Movies S1 to S8; References (129–166); MDAR Reproducibility Checklist Submitted 31 December 2024; accepted 30 September 2025 10.1126/science.adv6588

93. M. Shogren-Knaak et al., Histone H4-K16 acetylation controls chromatin structure and protein interactions. Science 311, 844–847 (2006). doi: 10.1126/science.1124000; pmid: 16469925 94. B. Dorigo et al., Nucleosome arrays reveal the two-start organization of the chromatin fiber. Science 306, 1571–1573 (2004). doi: 10.1126/science.1103124; pmid: 15567867 95. J. Zhou, J. Y. Fan, D. Rangasamy, D. J. Tremethick, The nucleosome surface regulates chromatin compaction and couples it with transcriptional repression. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 14, 1070–1076 (2007). doi: 10.1038/nsmb1323; pmid: 17965724 96. Q. Chen, R. Yang, N. Korolev, C. F. Liu, L. Nordenskiöld, Regulation of Nucleosome Stacking and Chromatin Compaction by the Histone H4 N-Terminal Tail-H2A Acidic Patch Interaction. J. Mol. Biol. 429, 2075–2092 (2017). doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2017.03.016; pmid: 28322915 97. T. S. Lewis, V. Sokolova, H. Jung, H. Ng, D. Tan, Structural basis of chromatin regulation by histone variant H2A.Z. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, 11379–11391 (2021). doi: 10.1093/nar/ gkab907; pmid: 34643712 98. W. Alvarado, J. Moller, A. L. Ferguson, J. J. de Pablo, Tetranucleosome Interactions Drive Chromatin Folding. ACS Cent. Sci. 7, 1019–1027 (2021). doi: 10.1021/ acscentsci.1c00085; pmid: 34235262 99. R. Collepardo-Guevara, T. Schlick, Chromatin fiber polymorphism triggered by variations of DNA linker lengths. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, 8061–8066 (2014). doi: 10.1073/ pnas.1315872111; pmid: 24847063 100. O. Perišić, R. Collepardo-Guevara, T. Schlick, Modeling studies of chromatin fiber structure as a function of DNA linker length. J. Mol. Biol. 403, 777–802 (2010). doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.07.057; pmid: 20709077 101. B. Dorigo, T. Schalch, K. Bystricky, T. J. Richmond, Chromatin fiber folding: Requirement for the histone H4 N-terminal tail. J. Mol. Biol. 327, 85–96 (2003). doi: 10.1016/ S0022-2836(03)00025-1; pmid: 12614610 102. T. Brouwer et al., A critical role for linker DNA in higher-order folding of chromatin fibers. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, 2537–2551 (2021). doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab058; pmid: 33589918 103. H. Zhou et al., Quantitative spatial analysis of chromatin biomolecular condensates using cryoelectron tomography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 122, e2426449122 (2025). doi: 10.1073/pnas.2426449122; pmid: 40327693 104. S. Bilokapic, M. Strauss, M. Halic, Histone octamer rearranges to adapt to DNA unwrapping. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 25, 101–108 (2018). doi: 10.1038/s41594-017- 0005-5; pmid: 29323273 105. Y. Takizawa et al., Cryo-EM Structures of Centromeric Tri-nucleosomes Containing a Central CENP-A Nucleosome. Structure 28, 44–53.e4 (2020). doi: 10.1016/ j.str.2019.10.016; pmid: 31711756 106. M. Dombrowski, M. Engeholm, C. Dienemann, S. Dodonova, P. Cramer, Histone H1 binding to nucleosome arrays depends on linker DNA length and trajectory. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 29, 493–501 (2022). doi: 10.1038/s41594-022-00768-w; pmid: 35581345 107. H.-X. Zhou, D. Kota, S. Qin, R. Prasad, Fundamental Aspects of Phase-Separated Biomolecular Condensates. Chem. Rev. 124, 8550–8595 (2024). doi: 10.1021/ acs.chemrev.4c00138; pmid: 38885177 108. D. Kota, R. Prasad, H.-X. Zhou, Adenosine Triphosphate Mediates Phase Separation of Disordered Basic Proteins by Bridging Intermolecular Interaction Networks. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 146, 1326–1336 (2024). doi: 10.1021/jacs.3c09134; pmid: 38174879 109. S. Iida et al., Single-nucleosome imaging reveals steady-state motion of interphase chromatin in living human cells. Sci. Adv. 8, eabn5626 (2022). doi: 10.1126/ sciadv.abn5626; pmid: 35658044 110. I. Y. Wong et al., Anomalous diffusion probes microstructure dynamics of entangled F-actin networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 178101 (2004). doi: 10.1103/ PhysRevLett.92.178101; pmid: 15169197 111. L.-H. Cai, S. Panyukov, M. Rubinstein, Mobility of Nonsticky Nanoparticles in Polymer Liquids. Macromolecules 44, 7853–7863 (2011). doi: 10.1021/ma201583q; pmid: 22058573 112. L.-H. Cai, S. Panyukov, M. Rubinstein, Hopping Diffusion of Nanoparticles in Polymer Matrices. Macromolecules 48, 847–862 (2015). doi: 10.1021/ma501608x; pmid: 25691803 113. M. Shayegan et al., Probing Inhomogeneous Diffusion in the Microenvironments of Phase-Separated Polymers under Confinement. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 7751–7757 (2019). doi: 10.1021/jacs.8b13349; pmid: 31017394 114. M. L. Gardel, K. E. Kasza, C. P. Brangwynne, J. Liu, D. A. Weitz, “Mechanical Response of Cytoskeletal Networks” in Biophysical Tools for Biologists, Volume Two: In Vivo Techniques, J. J. Correia, H. W. Detrich, II, Eds., vol. 89 of Methods in Cell Biology (Elsevier, 2008), pp. 487–519. . 115. B. E. Vos, T. M. Muenker, T. Betz, Characterizing intracellular mechanics via optical tweezers-based microrheology. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 88, 102374 (2024). doi: 10.1016/ j.ceb.2024.102374; pmid: 38824902 116. M. Lee et al., Optogenetic control of mRNA condensation reveals an intimate link between condensate material properties and functions. Nat. Commun. 15, 3216 (2024). doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-47442-x; pmid: 38622120 117. Y. Dai et al., Biomolecular condensates regulate cellular electrochemical equilibria. Cell 187, 5951–5966.e18 (2024). doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.08.018; pmid: 39260373

[Page 15]

Multiscale structure of chromatin condensates explains phase separation and material properties Huabin Zhou, Jan Huertas, M. Julia Maristany, Kieran Russell, June Ho Hwang, Run-Wen Yao, Nirnay Samanta, Joshua Hutchings, Ramya Billur, Momoko Shiozaki, Xiaowei Zhao, Lynda K. Doolittle, Bryan A. Gibson, Andrea Soranno, Margot Riggi, Jorge R. Espinosa, Zhiheng Yu, Elizabeth Villa, Rosana Collepardo-Guevara, and Michael K. Rosen

Science 390 (6777), eadv6588. DOI: 10.1126/science.adv6588

View the article online https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.adv6588 Permissions https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service Science (ISSN 1095-9203) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS. to original U.S. Government Works

Editor’s summary How linear DNA folds into complex, three-dimensional structures within cells has long been a puzzle. Using advanced imaging and simulations, Zhou et al. showed that a small structural change, just five extra DNA bases between nucleosomes, the basic units of DNA packaging, can drastically change how arrays pack together (see the Perspective by Zhang and Ramani). Depending on this spacing, the droplets can behave like liquids or take on solid-like properties. These results demonstrate how subtle structural features shape the physical properties of chromatin, offering insights into genome organization on larger scales. —Di Jiang
