[Page 1]

Force-matching Coarse-Graining without Forces

arXiv:2203.11167v1 [physics.comp-ph] 21 Mar 2022

Jonas Köhler,†,# Yaoyi Chen,†,# Andreas Krämer,∗,†,# Cecilia Clementi,∗,‡,¶,§,k and Frank Noé∗,†,k,‡,⊥ †Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, FU Berlin, Arnimallee 12, 14195 Berlin, Germany ‡Department of Physics, FU Berlin, Arnimallee 12, 14195 Berlin, Germany ¶Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA §Department of Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA kDepartment of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA ⊥Microsoft Research Cambridge, United Kingdom #equal contribution E-mail: andreas.kraemer@fu-berlin.de; cecilia.clementi@fu-berlin.de; frank.noe@fu-berlin.de Phone: +49 30 838 75354. Fax: +49 30 838-75367

Abstract

from the re-simulation problem because flows can directly sample from the equilibrium distribution they represent. Subsequently, the forces of the flow are used to train a CG force field by matching the coarse-grained forces directly, which is a much easier problem than traditional force-matching as it does not suffer from the noise problem. Besides not requiring forces, flow-matching also outperforms classical forcematching by an order of magnitude in terms of data efficiency and produces CG models that can capture the folding and unfolding of small proteins.

Coarse-grained (CG) molecular simulations have become a standard tool to study molecular processes on time- and length-scales inaccessible to all-atom simulations. Learning CG force fields from all-atom data has mainly relied on force-matching and relative entropy minimization. Force-matching is straightforward to implement but requires the forces on the CG particles to be saved during all-atom simulation, and because these instantaneous forces depend on all degrees of freedom, they provide a very noisy signal that makes training the CG force field data inefficient. Relative entropy minimization does not require forces to be saved and is more data-efficient, but requires the CG model to be re-simulated during the iterative training procedure, which can make the training procedure extremely costly or lead to failure to converge. Here we present flow-matching, a new training method for CG force fields that combines the advantages of force-matching and relative entropy minimization by leveraging normalizing flows, a generative deep learning method. Flow-matching first trains a normalizing flow to represent the CG probability density by using relative entropy minimization without suffering

Introduction Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have become a major computational tool to study biophysical processes on molecular scales. In classical all-atom MD, Newton’s equations of motion for a particle system are solved numerically, which requires a potential energy function that models the interatomic interactions. Presently, all-atom MD simulations can reach multiple microseconds for small to mediumsized protein systems on retail hardware. By using special-purpose Anton supercomput1

[Page 2]

ers 1,2 or combining distributed computing with Markov modeling 3,4 or enhanced sampling approaches, it is possible to probe millisecondtimescales and sometimes beyond. 5,6 Despite this progress, many biomolecular processes of interest exceed these time and length scales by orders of magnitude. Also highthroughput simulations that would be needed, e.g., to screen protein sequences for highaffinity protein-protein interactions, cannot be efficiently done with all-atom MD. A common approach to go to larger timeand length-scales or high-throughput simulations, is coarse-grained (CG) molecular dynamics. 7–19 In “bottom-up” coarse-graining, one defines a mapping from the all-atom representation to the CG model (e.g. by grouping sets of atoms to coarse-grained beads). A frequently used CG principle is known as thermodynamic consistency in the coarse-graining literature and as density matching in machine learning: the CG model should generate the same equilibrium distribution, as one would obtain from a fully converged all-atom simulation after applying the coarse-graining map to all simulation frames. 10 Provided that the quantities of interest can still be computed from the coarse-grained representation of the molecule, this principle can lead to “exact” coarse-grained models that can predict the same thermodynamic quantities as the all-atom ground truth model. Among the techniques for such bottom-up modeling, 10,12,20–23 two methods have been explicitly developed to achieve thermodynamic consistency: variational force-matching (also known as multi-scale coarse graining) 21,22 and relative entropy minimization. 23 The present study presents a third, more efficient, alternative, flow-matching. Our approach combines aspects of force-matching and relative entropy minimization with deep generative modeling. The centerpiece of this novel method is a normalizing flow, 24–26 a generative neural network that maps from a simple prior distribution to a complicated distribution via a learned bijection Φ(·; θ). Normalizing flows can be trained via density estimation on configurations coming from an all-atom trajectory.

Crucially, they then provide direct access to the Boltzmann distribution of the CG system (in an approximate manner). In other words, normalizing flows can efficiently produce independent samples and also corresponding CG free energies and forces. The enormous potential of normalizing flows in molecular applications has previously been demonstrated, 27–34 e.g. in Boltzmann generators, 27 where they were used as one-shot samplers for atomistic systems. However, the bijectivity constraint on the networks requires architectures that complicate the incorporation of physical symmetries and hamper transferability. 35 These restrictions obstruct use of normalizing flows as (CG) potentials. However, as we will show in the following, they can be invaluable helpers in optimizing a suitable potential. Concretely, flow-matching tackles the coarsegraining problem in a two-step procedure (see Fig. 1c): firstly, a flow is trained on a given set of samples via density estimation which implicitly defines a flow potential V(·; θ); secondly, the configurations and forces sampled by the flow are used to train a physically-grounded CG potential V (·; ξ) via force-matching. Hence, the normalizing flow serves as an intermediate to efficiently optimize a thermodynamically consistent CG force field that can easily incorporate the desired symmetries and be defined using a transferable functional form. While this stepwise approach leans on the same underlying principles as force-matching and relative entropy minimization, it exhibits some decisive advantages. In contrast to forcematching (Fig. 1a), it avoids incorporation of atomistic reference forces, which are usually not stored in MD simulations. Furthermore, the flow can generate a virtually infinite number of “synthetic” configurations and forces. These forces are less noisy and more independent than raw atomistic forces, which benefits efficient optimization of the CG potential. In contrast to relative entropy minimization (Fig. 1b), flow-matching avoids costly intermediate simulations. These simulations are required traditionally to estimate the relative entropy of the target ensemble with respect to each intermediate model ensemble. 23 The present method

[Page 3]

takes the reverse approach: rather than first optimizing the model CG potential and then sampling from it, we first learn to sample from the target ensemble and then use these samples to fit a CG model. This work uses the recently introduced CGNet 17 architecture to eventually learn and express the CG potential. This choice is rather arbitrary and the CGNet could be replaced by a different functional form, 19,36–42 such as CGSchNet 19 or a just a parametric sum of analytical force field terms that are frequently employed in CG models 12,43–46 such as Martini. 45,46 The same holds for choosing the flow model. This work uses augmented normalizing flows 47,48 with coupling layers based on affine 49 and smooth mixture transforms. 50 Augmenting the configuration space with noise variables helps building expressive flows, but other latent variable models could also be used as an alternative. This category includes other normalizing flow architectures as well as variational autoencoders 51 and their generalizations. 52,53 Such generative networks as well as generative adverserial networks have previously been applied to coarse-graining applications. 54–56 Notably, the fitting of energy models based on forces is routinely used in the machine learning community under the term score matching. 57–60 However, such prior work mostly focused on minimizing the implicit score matching objective as defined in Hyvärinen and Dayan 57 using either denoising score matching 58 or noisy approximations of the potential Laplacian. 59 Other work relied on the framework of noisecontrastive estimation 61 to discriminate the energy model against an adversarial distribution, e.g. as given by a normalizing flow. 62 Yet, to the best of our knowledge no such prior work considered explicit force-matching against a reference model which had been fit using a likelihood-based objective. By way of outline, the Theory section introduces the theoretical underpinnings and presents the flow-matching approach. The Methods section introduces our specific implementation of the flow and the CGnet for peptide systems. The Results section then demonstrates the advantages of the new coarse-

graining method by comparing flow-matching with classical force-matching and applying it to several MD trajectories of fast-folding proteins.

Theory Coarse-graining of equilibrium densities We consider systems R ∈ R3N in thermodynamic equilibrium following a Boltzmann-type distribution μ(R) ∝ exp(−U (R)/kT )

(1)

where U : R3N → R is the potential energy of the system, T the temperature and k the Boltzmann constant. Coarse-graining considers a (linear) mapping Ξ : R3N → R3n that projects fine-grained states R onto a lower-dimensional representation r = ΞR. E.g., a protein conformation of N atoms is projected onto a chosen set of beads by only considering movements of the Cα -atoms in the backbone. Bottom-up coarse graining aims to find the marginal density over the coarsegrained coordinates, ν(r) = dR μ(R) · δ[ΞR=r] (R). (2) Matching the potential of mean force One option to attack this problem in a bottomup fashion relies on force information from the ground-truth potential U . By setting V (r) = −kT log ν(r) + const

(3)

we obtain the so-called potential of mean-force (PMF). The PMF is the CG potential, whose force is exactly the mean force over all corresponding fine-grained structures: ∇r V (r) = ER∼μ(R|r) [∇R U (R)] ,

(4)

where the conditional density is given by μ(R|r) =

μ(R) . ν(r)

(5)

This identity enables fitting V from a finegrained MD trajectory D = (R1 , . . . , RT ) with

[Page 4]

Figure 1: a) Classical force-matching: the parameters ξ of a coarse-grained potential V (·; ξ) are optimized to minimize the mean-squared error of model forces with respect to projected atomistic forces f on the training configurations r. b) Relative entropy methods: simulations are performed in the coarse-grained potential to produce samples and enable evaluating (and minimizing) the relative entropy. c) Present method: the parameters θ of a normalizing flow are first optimized to match the CG density from the ground-truth samples r. This defines the flow-based potential V(·; θ). After training the samples and forces from the flow are used to train a coarse-grained potential V (·; ξ) via force-matching. Slow / inaccurate sampling steps are highlighted red. d) The normalizing flow architecture used in this work to model V(·; θ). After transforming the CG beads into an internal coordinate (IC) representation made from bonds (d), angles (θ) and dihedral torsions (φ) a trainable stack of coupling layers transform thems into uniform noise. e) The modified CG-Net architecture used in this work to model V(·; ξ). f ) Chignolin in explicit solvent. The magenta spheres show the CG beads of the Cα model.

[Page 5]

forces

the normalizing flow f (R) = −∇U (R).

V(r; θ) = − log p(r; θ)

(6)

Concretely, we can parameterize a candidate potential V (·; θ) and use force-matching 17,22 to align it with the PMF via the variational forcematching loss

L(θ) = ER,f ∼D kΞf f + ∇ΞR V (ΞR; θ)k22 . (7)

approximates the PMF. Challenges of flow-based CG potentials A drawback of using normalizing flows to model a CG potential is the bijectivity constraint on Φ(·; θ) and the need to compute its Jacobian during the optimization. These requirements can limit the expressivity of a candidate forcefield V(·; θ) modeled this way. They also complicate the incorporation of physical priors and symmetries. We suggest a twofold solution these problems. First, we obtain more flexible bijections by introducing latent variables. Second, we show how to reconstruct the learned CG force-field in the form of an unconstrained CG potential V (·; ξ) using a variational forcematching loss.

For the CG models considered here, the force and coordinate mappings are identical Ξf = Ξ. Coarse-graining via density estimation We cannot minimize (7) in the common scenario that fine-grained forces are inaccessible. In this situation, we can instead estimate ν(·; θ) ∝ exp(−V (·; θ)/kT ) from conformations alone via density estimation. Density estimation minimizes the relative entropy L(θ) = ER∼D [− log ν(ΞR; θ)] .

(10)

Variational density estimation As a first step, we relax the bijectivity constraint by the introduction of k extra variables η ∈ Rk and sample a joint state z = (z0 , z1 ) ∈ Rn+k from a joint (Gaussian/uniform) reference density q(z0 , z1 ). Now we define Φ as an invertible coordinate transformation over those joint n + k degrees of freedom. Similarly as before, we can derive the tractable joint density p(r, η; θ) of a transformed pair (r, η) = Φ(z0 , z1 ; θ). We can train this augmented model by introducing a variational density ν̃(η|r) over the latent variables. This defines a joint density ν(r, η) = ν(r) · ν̃(η|r) from which we obtain the following variational bound to the marginal likelihood p(r; θ):

(8)

The minimizer can be interpreted as the maximum-likelihood solution of an energybased model trained on the projected trajectory ΞD = (ΞR1 , . . . ΞRT ). Maximizing the likelihood (8) for general candidate models V (·; θ) is a challenging machine-learning objective due to the lack of a tractable normalizing constant. Tractable density estimation We can avoid the sampling problem of (8) by parameterizing V (·; θ) with a tractable density model. A possible class of such models is given by normalizing flows. 24–26 Flows are invertible neural networks Φ(·; θ) : Rn → Rn that transform a simple reference distribution q, e.g., a Gaussian or uniform density, into our target density. If we sample z ∼ q(z) and transform it into r = Φ(z; θ) the resulting model density of samples p(r; θ) is obtained via

p(r; θ) = q Φ−1 (z; θ) · |JΦ−1 (r; θ)| . (9)

L(θ) = ER∼D,η∼ν̃(η|r) [− log p(ΞR, η; θ)] (11) ≥ ER∼D [− log p(ΞR; θ)] . While such augmented normalizing flows 47,48 allow to break topological barriers and satisfy general density approximation guarantees, 52,63 they come at the cost that the marginal p(r; θ) becomes intractable. As a result, we can no longer compute V(r; θ) and corresponding forces. However, we can still compute a joint

We can now plug (9) into (8) and get an efficient training objective. After training, the energy of

[Page 6]

energy model over CG coordinates and latent variables V(r, η; θ) = − log p(r, η; θ),

2. After convergence, we train an unconstrained model V (r; ξ) which extracts the knowledge from a teacher model V(r, η; θ) by minimizing (15) while keeping the teacher model fixed.

(12)

which can be used to train unconstrained CG models as follows.

Methods Teacher-student force-matching Our idea is to teach the information about r contained in a trained latent-variable model V(r, η; θ) to an unconstrained CG potential V (r; ξ) that does not suffer from the architectural constraints of flows. We make the following assumptions for V(r, η; θ) to hold after training:

We will now discuss how we can use and evaluate this approach when modeling the CG potential of protein systems.

Models In a first step, we have to decide how we choose our CG coordinates. In the second step, we need to design a suitable flow transformation Φ(·; θ) for the density estimation part. Finally, we need to choose an unconstrained model V (r; ξ) that we can train against the forces of the flow-induced potential V(r, η; θ).

1. we can efficiently draw samples (r, η) ∼ p(r, η; θ) from the model with the guarantee that the marginal p(r) is an approximate fit of the unknown marginal ν(r). 2. we can cheaply compute noisy forces f (r, η; θ) = ∇r V(r, η; θ),

(13)

Coarse-graining operator Ξ Our coarsegraining operator Ξ : R3N → R3n projects an N -atom peptide conformation onto a subset of n of its backbone atoms. For smaller system (e.g., capped alanine) we can chose backbone carbons and nitrogens. For larger systems (e.g., fast-folder proteins) we project all-atom conformations onto Cα beads of the backbone (see Fig. 1f). Details on the coarse-graining operator for the specific systems discussed in this work can be found in the SI. The inverse flow transformation Φ−1 (·; θ) required to define V(r, η; θ) in (9) is a composition of a fixed coordinate transformation into an internal coordinate (IC) representation followed by a trainable normalizing flow (see Fig. 1d). For the IC transformation we follow Noé et al. 27 and project the Cartesian coarsegrained degrees of freedom onto bond lengths, angles, and dihedral torsions of adjacent CG beads. The normalizing flow follows the architecture of Köhler et al. 50 and consists of coupling layers 49,64 where we transform bonds and angles and torsions using either spline or smooth hypertoric transforms. 50,65 We increase expressivity and relax bijectivity constraints of

which satisfy f (r; θ) = Eη∼p(ν|r;θ) [f (r, η; θ)] . (14) Then we can train an unconstrained V (r; ξ) via the variational force-matching objective

L(ξ) = E(r,η)∼p(θ) kf (r, η; θ) + ∇r V (r; ξ)k22

≥ E(r)∼p(θ) kf (r; θ) + ∇r V (r; ξ)k22 . (15) Under assumptions 1. and 2. this model will converge to the true PMF. All proofs are given in supplementary information (SI). Force-matching without forces The whole method can now be summarized in the following two steps: 1. We first train a flow-based density model V(r, η; θ) on trajectory data D by minimizing the variational bound to the likelihood (11). This step does not require atomistic force information and works if only conformations R are availabe.

[Page 7]

the normalizing flow by introducing k extra latent variables η leading to the variational objective (11). We choose a factorized base density q(z0 , z1 ) = q(z0 ) · q(z1 ) given by a uniform density q(z0 ) = U(0, 1) for the IC degrees of freedom and a isotropic normal density q(z1 ) = N (0, 1) for the latent variables η. Finally, we choose the variational density ν̃(η|r) = ν̃(η) = N (0, 1) to be an independent isotropic Gaussian, as well. Additional technical details on the implementation of the normalizing flow can be found in the SI.

sampling scheme and filter flow samples that violate energies beyond a set threshold. Detailed setup and explanation of the training can be found in the SI.

Coarse-grained sampling The trained CG models V (r; ξ) are evaluated by comparing their ability to reproduce the thermodynamic features of the original system. In order to estimate the accuracy of the thermodynamics implied by the CG potentials, we draw samples from the Boltzmann distribution and use them to plot free energy surfaces. For the flow models it is straightforward, since we can directly draw independent samples in latent space according to the prior distributions and use the forward transformation of the flow to map them to CG coordinates. As for the CGnet-based models, we perform MD simulations in the CG space, similarly as by Wang et al. 17 and Husic et al. 19 Except for a larger time step (5-fs), we keep the simulation parameters, such as the thermostat temperature and friction coefficient, consistent with the corresponding all-atom simulations. In addition, two methods are used to facilitate sampling: 1. batched simulations from different starting structures and 2. parallel tempering. The starting structures are sampled according to the equilibrium distribution of the all-atom simulations (following Wang et al. 17 ). The parallel tempering employs two replicas at temperatures 300 K and 450 K for CG√alanine and three replicas at temperatures T0 , T0 × 500 K and 500 K for fast folders, in which T0 is the simulation temperature used for the reference all-atom data set (see Lindorff-Larsen et al. 5 ). Capped alanine simulations for each replica and starting structure are performed for 5 × 105 steps (2.5 ns). Fast folder simulations for each protein, replica and starting structure are performed for 12 × 106 steps (60 ns parallel tempering) and 20 × 106 steps (100 ns at reference temperature T0 ), respectively. The conformations at the reference temperature are recorded every 100 time steps to analyze the generated conformational distributions.

Unconstrained CG potential V (r; ξ) The unconstrained potential V (r; ξ) in the second step follows the CGnet architecture of Wang et al. 17 . This model transforms euclidean coordinates of the CG beads into pairwise distances, angles and torsions (similar to the IC transformation introduced in the last paragraph). Then these features are fed into a fully connected neural network to output a scalar energy. Furthermore, the model adds simple repulsive and harmonic prior energy terms to this scalar, which prevent steric clashes and bond breaking (see Fig. 1e). We extended the original architecture by introducing skip-connections 66 and replaced tanh-activations with silu-activations 67 which both greatly improved results. Technical details on the implementation of this coarse-graining potential can be found in the SI.

Training The flow potential can be trained on the trajectory data using the variational bound to the likelihood (11). During training we monitor the cross validation error of the forces between models trained on different folds. We stop training once we observe convergence. The unconstrained potential is then trained against the flow using the variational force-matching objective (15). Due to the constraints of a normalizing flow some of the generated samples from the teacher model are not perfect. Small violations that are insignificant from a likelihood perspective can cause large fluctuations of the prior energy, e.g., if bond lengths are violated or beads overlap. We solve this with a rejection

[Page 8]

Results

CGnets and original CGnets) as described in Methods and compare it with the ground truth. Since the distribution is high-dimensional, we project it onto the slow degrees of freedom, namely the torsion angles φ and ψ. We then histogram the projected samples over a uniform grid, which gives us a discrete approximation to the free energy surface in the projected 2D space. Figure 2b illustrates the free energies of Ala2 configurations on the ψ/φ torsion plane and the marginal free energies over φ and ψ. The samples generated by the flow and both CGnet simulations all recover the essence of the reference distribution from all-atom simulation. However, while the flow and the Flow-CGnet match the ground truth virtually perfectly, the baseline CGnet over-stabilizes the metastable regions at φ > 0 and disrupts the detailed shape of the energy basins, which reflects inaccuracy in the CG potential modeling.

Capped alanine As a first example, we consider capped alanine (also called alanine dipeptide; henceforth abbreviated as Ala2). In line with previous work, 17,19 the CG mapping is defined based on five backbone carbons and nitrogens, see Fig. 2a. Following the above-described flow-matching protocol, we first train and validate normalizing flows solely based on the CG coordinate samples from all-atom simulations and then train secondary CGnet potentials against samples from the trained flows. These models will be denoted as “Flow-CGnets”. To compare with classical force-matching, we also train standard CGnets on the same set of samples—but with the forces recorded in the all-atom simulation— as baseline models. We evaluate the thermodynamic accuracy of all models trained above by comparing the conformational distributions of equilibrium samples with the ground truth from all-atom simulations. Due to the stochastic nature of the neural network training, we adopt cross validation for quantitative comparisons of the CG potentials. We split the data into four folds that correspond to four independent simulation runs. In each cross-validation experiment, we set aside one fold as the validation set, while using the rest for training with a set of hyperparameters and a pre-defined training procedure. The trained models are then assessed against the corresponding validation sets with a set of metrics (e.g., the validation force-matching error 17 ). The mean and standard deviation of each metric for a certain training strategy are reported and compared.

Data efficiency We further investigate the statistical efficiency of the approaches by analyzing how the model performance changes with the size of available training data set. Both the flow-based models and baseline CGnets are data-driven and rely on samples from the all-atom system (the latter need force information in addition). Since sampling per se is costly and in many cases the bottleneck of the whole process, it is desirable that an accurate CG potential can be constructed with minimum amount of data. In order to compare the data efficiency of different methods, we measure the effects of the training set size with several metrics, including the KL divergence, MSE of free energy and the validation FM errors. 17 The first two are evaluated on the discrete histogram against the validation data distribution. 19 Concretely, we perform training with [5k, 10k, 20k, 50k, 100k, 200k, 500k, 750k] samples in the training set for both flow-matching and baseline forcematching. Detailed training setup can be found in SI. Figure 2c shows the metrics for different training set sizes. The Flow-CGnet has a clear

High-quality CG potentials We first examine the highest accuracy that can be achieved with all methods on the maximumsize training set. We sample from the equilibrium distribution implied by the trained models either by direct sampling (for flow models) or by performing CG–MD simulations (for Flow-

[Page 9]

Figure 2: Application of flow-matching on capped alanine. a) The CG mapping used for the flow and CGnets. b) Free energy profile of capped alanine projected on the φ/ψ plane (Ramachandran plot) for the original all-atom system from MD simulation (ground truth), for original CGnet model (baseline), for the flow model and for the Flow-CGnet. c) Model accuracy as a function of training set size for capped alanine. Shown metrics are estimated KL divergence and MSE between discrete free energies on the grid, as well as validation FM error. Dashed lines correspond to the flow after MLE training, while solid lines show values for the CGNets trained via force-matching against either the flow-sample (blue) or all-atom ground truth sample (orange). force-matching training of Flow-CGnets rely on the correct distribution of the sample conformations and accuracy of the predicted forces, the latter of which requires more data to reach a good accuracy (Fig. 2c bottom).

advantage over the original CGnet models in terms of data efficiency: we can achieve an equivalent performance of the latter by less than one tenth of training data except for the validation FM error. Comparing the criteria between the flow and Flow-CGnet models, we observe that the flow models reach convergence in terms of the distribution-based criteria (i.e., KL divergence and MSE of free energy) with small training sets. Although the Flow-CGnets can reproduce the accuracy of force prediction of the flow models asymptotically, they only start to accurately sample the correct distribution when the training set size is larger than 50,000. One possible explanation is that the

Fast-folding proteins The flow-matching method is applied to molecular trajectories of four small proteins from Lindorff-Larsen et al. 5 Among their 12 fast folders, the four smallest are selected, namely chignolin, tryptophan cage, the α/β protein BBA, and the villin headpiece. These proteins consist of 10, 20, 28, and 35 amino acids and

[Page 10]

Figure 3: Flow-matching results for four fast-folding proteins. From top to bottom: a) free energy landscapes of all-atom MD and Flow-CGnet model over TICs; b) excerpt from 100 ns CG simulation showing folding and unfolding events; c) free energy curve over RMSD for the MD and CG samples with PDB structure as the reference; d) RMSD distribution of the folded basin (samples within the red rectangle in (a)); e) 10 exemplary folded samples (shown in half-transparent magenta) from CG simulation superposed on the experimental structure (rainbow color scheme).

[Page 11]

will be denoted chignolin, trpcage, bba, and villin, respectively (see Ref. 5 for simulation details). Each trajectory corresponds to at least 100 μs of all-atom MD. Note that the trajectories do not contain atomistic forces so that force-matching is not an option if one wants to parameterize a CG force field based on these data. Relative entropy minimization is difficult due to the high cost of sampling these systems exhaustively: folding times range from 0.6 (chignolin) to 18 μs (bba). All four proteins are coarse-grained using one bead per residue with beads representing alpha carbons, see Fig. 1d. First, normalizing flows are trained for each protein using likelihood maximization on the Cα coordinates. Second, protein-specific CGnets are optimized via forcematching on synthetic position/force pairs generated by the flow. The final CGnets are simulated using Langevin dynamics with parallel tempering to produce equilibrium samples from the CG model. The trajectories from the replica at the same temperature as the all-atom simulation are used for the analyses below. In order to show folding and unfolding events may happen without enhanced sampling strategies, we also performed pure Langevin dynamics simulations with learned Flow-CGnet models.

Folding thermodynamics Moving into the unfolded region (RMSD ≥ 5Å), the match between atomistic and CG free energies worsens. While all CG models exhibit the characteristic folding energy barrier, the height of this barrier and the folded/unfolded ratio differs between the MD and CG data. Generally, the folded states are less stable in the CG model. The energy barrier is lower for chignolin and higher for the other three proteins. Compared to the Flow-CGnet samples, the flow samples show better consistency with the data (see SI). While the Flow-CGnet underestimates the folding free energy by up to ≈ 6 kT , the flow only differs by up to ≈ 1 kT from the all-atom result. Frequent transitions between folded and unfolded configurations were observed in 100 ns simulation runs without parallel tempering (Fig. 3b). Folding pathways Figure 3a show the joint densities over the first two TICA coordinates. 68,69 These reaction coordinates visualize the slowest processes in the MD simulation, which correspond to folding and unfolding, see SI for details. The FlowCGnet densities resemble the atomistic densities, showing that the global patterns in the folding process are captured. The match worsens with increasing sequence length: for chignolin the Flow-CGnet recovers the shape of the distribution well, for trpcage and bba some minor metastable states are missing, and for villin some regions that are sparsely populated in the MD data are overstabilized.

Folded structures Figure 3 compares protein folding between the atomistic and CG simulations. All CG models recover the folded PDB structures up to 2.5 Å RMSD, which is of similar quality as the reference all-atom simulations. Figure 3e shows exemplary structures from the CG simulations superposed with the experimental crystal structures, demonstrating excellent agreement. The density and free energy plots over the RMSD (Fig. 3cd) indicate that the CG density matches the projected all-atom trajectory in the folded basin: the primary density peaks are nearly indistinguishable between the CG and MD densities, which indicates that all CG models accurately represent the flexibility of their respective folded states.

Discussion Comparison with force-matching We have compared the new flow-matching CG approach to standard variational forcematching. The results for both considered test cases show consistently that the flow greatly simplifies the coarse-graining problem. Firstly, it does not require ground truth forces for train11

[Page 12]

ing, allowing coarse graining on virtually any converged MD trajectory rather than handcrafted trajectories with forces. Secondly, the resulting CG equilibrium distributions matched the all-atom distributions far better on the slow degrees of freedom. All relevant meta-stable states were resolved with accurate relative free energies. Flow-matching even produced relatively accurate CG models when only a tenth of the training data was used. In contrast, pure force-matching-based CG models deteriorated quickly when the amount of training data was reduced. For chignolin, even the full dataset was not sufficient to obtain a reasonable folded/unfolded ratio. The substantial advantages of the flow-based over the force-matching-based coarse graining approach can be explained conceptually by the different loss functions. The variational force MSE depends solely on noisy local information that stems mostly from local energy minima. Consequently, a CG potential trained to minimize such a loss function may faithfully recover the free energy profiles in and around the local basins in the training data. However, the relative weighting between different metastable states has to be inferred from forces at transition states, which are rare in the training data. This makes for a data-inefficient objective that is poorly suited to match the shape of the free energy surface globally. In contrast, the flow is trained by density estimation, whose goal is to globally reproduce the PMF. Arguably, this objective better suits the coarse-graining problem, where reproducing the relative weighting between different metastable states is more important than reproducing the local mean forces accurately.

tion errors that propagate into the MD trajectory. Thus, even in the infinite-sample limit, the density estimation in the flow-based coarsegraining tries to match the empirical Boltzmann distribution generated by the shadow Hamiltonian, while the optimum of the forcematching residual corresponds to the raw potential. Additionally, finite-sample effects can lead to an overfitting of forces, while even local energy differences are not well reproduced. In combination, these two effects explain why Flow-CGnets outperform the baseline models in terms of the distribution-based metrics but fail to improve the validation force-matching error. Training data requirements While matching the empirical distribution benefits data efficiency, it also requires that the underlying allatom data should come from an equilibrated ensemble. If sampling the atomistic Boltzmann distribution is infeasible, the ensemble can be generated through proper reweighting (as we did for chignolin, see SI for details). Matching the flow to out-of-equilibrium data will alter the CG distribution accordingly, as the flowbased coarse-graining procedure does not utilize any direct information about the atomistic potential. While the consistency of standard variational force-matching is also derived in the framework of thermodynamic equilibrium, it might be comparatively more forgiving to convergence issues, as it directly employs the atomistic forces. There are also theoretical developments in generalizing the force-matching method for non-equilibrium cases, such as Ref. In such situations (but generally whenever atomistic force information is available), it might be beneficial to train the flow by combining density estimation with force-matching. Such a mixed loss can be especially efficient when using flows with continuous forces. 50

Explaining the validation force-matching error The only metric, on which FM-based models consistently outperformed flow-based models, was the validation force-matching error. At first sight, this observation is counterintuitive and seems to undermine the thermodynamic consistency of the variational forcematching approach. However, as we discuss in detail in the SI, the consistency of FM is very nuanced, where results depend on integra-

Network architectures The flow transforms in this work used piecewise rational quadratic splines 65 for capped alanine and smooth mixture transforms 50 for the fast folders. Spline transforms have analytical for12

[Page 13]

ward and inverse passes and are thus cheap to evaluate for both sampling and density estimation. However, their forces are generally not smooth at the bin edges. As a result, the spline flow training takes longer to produce converged forces than converged energies, as shown inf Fig. 2c. The smooth normalizing flows have a better inductive bias, which accelerates training. One important point to note in this context is that the proposed two-step coarse-graining methodology is not limited to the architectures we chose in this work for both the generative model and the CG potential. The only requirement is that the first model can be trained via likelihood maximization and generate samples efficiently, while the second model can effectively learn the CG potential of mean force via force-matching.

data and hyperparameters for the model architecture and optimization process, may also contribute to the transferability and make this a non-trivial task. Therefore we leave this topic for future investigation. Scalability The CG model quality deteriorated for larger proteins, which is not surprising. The present normalizing flows are built on a global internal coordinate representation. As the length of the peptide chain grows, the target potential energy becomes extremely sensitive with respect to these internal coordinates. For example, a tiny rotation of one torsion can easily cause steric clashes in a different part of the molecule. Applying flow-matching to larger molecules will likely require different featurizations so that the present method will directly benefit from advances in deep molecular generation. For small molecules, we find that spline and smooth mixture flows on the internal coordinates are able to reproduce the CG conformational distribution very accurately. Other work 27–29,32,33 has also found suitable flow architectures for small molecules, proteins, and even explicitly solvated systems, but did not report whether they could produce quantitatively matching forces. There is currently no one-size-fits-all flow method for general molecular applications. Applying the flow-matching method to large biomolecules or crowded molecular systems such as CG fluids or lipids likely requires further progress on generative models.

Transferable CG models Here we have focussed on obtaining an accurate CG model for a specific system, from which we have samples for training. The next step is to achieve transferability among a certain group of molecules, e.g., polypeptides and proteins. In other words, we expect to train CG potentials over conformations from a finite number of chemical entities and then generalize the knowledge to other systems. In order to achieve transferability, the ML models should have a unified approach to process the input regardless of the size and molecular topology of the system, thus allowing the same set of parameters be applied for different molecules. This is not the case for either the spline flow or the CGnet architecture used in this work, and to our knowledge no current flow implementation is able to sample distributions from multiple molecules. Nevertheless, we point out it is possible to pursue transferability in chemical space with merely a slight modification on our current framework: we train one separate flow model for each individual molecular system and then distill the knowledge from the flows by training a common secondary CG potential that support several CG systems (e.g., CGSchNets 19 ) against all flows. There is no doubt that many other factors, such as the proportions of different molecules in the training

Conclusions We have developed a two-stage approach to bottom-up coarse-graining that addresses two major problems with classical approaches, namely data availability and efficiency. The flow-matching method produces thermodynamically consistent CG models without relying on either all-atom ground truth forces or subsequent CG simulations. The key ingredient of our method is a generative deep neural network that is introduced into the optimization workflow. In the first stage, this network (a normalizing flow) is trained to

[Page 14]

capture the configurational distribution from all-atom coordinates (mapped to CG space). It simultaneously learns to generate synthetic coordinate-force pairs that closely resemble the desired coarse grained thermodynamics. In the second stage, a CG potential is trained to match the forces emitted by the normalizing flow. This secondary potential is not restricted by the flow architectural requirements, and thus can be designed to have a physically meaningful and potentially transferable functional form. This approach sidesteps the data inefficiency of direct force-matching by replacing the noisy variational force-matching loss by a more robust objective, the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Compared with classical force-matching, flowmatching captured the global thermodynamics of small peptides much more accurately than CGnet baseline models. Astoundingly, this was even the case, when only a fraction (< 10%) of the data was used during training. Applications to four small proteins yielded CG potentials that were able to fold and unfold the proteins via the same pathways as all-atom MD. Thereby, the present work opens a new and efficient path to reach near-atomistic accuracy on scales not amenable to atomistic simulations. The method will directly benefit from the currently rapid development of more powerful generative networks and deep CG potentials to systematically bridge atomistic and mesoscopic scales.

the Welch Foundation (C-1570), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB/TRR 186/A12, and SFB 1078/C7), and the Einstein Foundation Berlin. The 3D molecular structures are visualized with PyMOL. 71

Acknowledgement The authors would like to thank Aleksander E. P. Durumeric, Nicholas E. Charron, Brooke E. Husic, Manuel Dibak, Leon Klein and Leon Sixt for insightful discussions. We gratefully acknowledge funding from European Commission (Grant No. ERC CoG 772230 “ScaleCell”), the International Max Planck Research School for Biology and Computation (IMPRS–BAC), the BMBF (Berlin Institute for Learning and Data, BIFOLD), the Berlin Mathematics center MATH+ (AA1-6, EF1-2) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG (GRK DAEDALUS, SFB1114/A04). C.C. acknowledge National Science Foundation (CHE1738990, CHE-1900374, and PHY-2019745),

(5) Lindorff-Larsen, K.; Piana, S.; Dror, R. O.; Shaw, D. E. How fastfolding proteins fold. Science 2011, 334, 517–520.

References (1) Shaw, D. E. et al. Anton 2: Raising the Bar for Performance and Programmability in a Special-Purpose Molecular Dynamics Supercomputer. Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Networking, Storage Anal. SC 2014, 2015-January, 41–53. (2) Shaw, D. E. et al. Anton 3: Twenty Microseconds of Molecular Dynamics Simulation before Lunch. Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Networking, Storage Anal. SC 2021, (3) Prinz, J.-H.; Wu, H.; Sarich, M.; Keller, B.; Senne, M.; Held, M.; Chodera, J. D.; Schütte, C.; Noé, F. Markov models of molecular kinetics: Generation and validation. J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 134, 174105. (4) Husic, B. E.; Pande, V. S. Markov state models: From an art to a science. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 2386–2396.

(6) Plattner, N.; Doerr, S.; De Fabritiis, G.; Noé, F. Complete protein–protein association kinetics in atomic detail revealed by molecular dynamics simulations and Markov modelling. Nat. Chem. 2017 910 2017, 9, 1005–1011. (7) Clementi, C.; Nymeyer, H.; Onuchic, J. N. Topological and energetic factors: what determines the structural details of the transition state ensemble and “en-route”

[Page 15]

intermediates for protein folding? An investigation for small globular proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 2000, 298, 937–953.

(17) Wang, J.; Olsson, S.; Wehmeyer, C.; Pérez, A.; Charron, N. E.; De Fabritiis, G.; Noé, F.; Clementi, C. Machine learning of coarse-grained molecular dynamics force fields. ACS central science 2019, 5, 755–767.

(8) Clementi, C. Coarse-grained models of protein folding: Toy-models or predictive tools? Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2008, 18, 10–15.

(18) Wang, J.; Chmiela, S.; Müller, K.-R.; Noé, F.; Clementi, C. Ensemble learning of coarse-grained molecular dynamics force fields with a kernel approach. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 152, 194106.

(9) Saunders, M. G.; Voth, G. A. CoarseGraining Methods for Computational Biology. Annu. Rev. Bioph. Biom. 2013, 42, 73–93.

(19) Husic, B. E.; Charron, N. E.; Lemm, D.; Wang, J.; Pérez, A.; Majewski, M.; Krämer, A.; Chen, Y.; Olsson, S.; de Fabritiis, G., et al. Coarse graining molecular dynamics with graph neural networks. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2020, 153,

(10) Noid, W. G. Perspective: Coarse-grained models for biomolecular systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 139, 090901. (11) Ingólfsson, H. I.; Lopez, C. A.; Uusitalo, J. J.; de Jong, D. H.; Gopal, S. M.; Periole, X.; Marrink, S. J. The power of coarse graining in biomolecular simulations. WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci. 2014, 4, 225–248.

(20) Reith, D.; Pütz, M.; Müller-Plathe, F. Deriving effective mesoscale potentials from atomistic simulations. Journal of Computational Chemistry 2003, 24, 1624–1636.

(12) Kmiecik, S.; Gront, D.; Kolinski, M.; Wieteska, L.; Dawid, A. E.; Kolinski, A. Coarse-grained protein models and their applications. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 7898–7936.

(21) Izvekov, S.; Voth, G. A. A Multiscale Coarse-Graining Method for Biomolecular Systems. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109, 2469–2473.

(13) Pak, A. J.; Voth, G. A. Advances in coarse-grained modeling of macromolecular complexes. Curr. Opin. Struc. Biol. 2018, 52, 119.

(22) Noid, W. G.; Chu, J.-W.; Ayton, G. S.; Krishna, V.; Izvekov, S.; Voth, G. A.; Das, A.; Andersen, H. C. The multiscale coarse-graining method. I. A rigorous bridge between atomistic and coarsegrained models. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 244114.

(14) Chen, J.; Chen, J.; Pinamonti, G.; Clementi, C. Learning effective molecular models from experimental observables. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018, 14, 3849–

(23) Shell, M. S. The relative entropy is fundamental to multiscale and inverse thermodynamic problems. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 129, 144108.

(15) Singh, N.; Li, W. Recent Advances in Coarse-Grained Models for Biomolecules and Their Applications. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20 .

(24) Tabak, E. G.; Vanden-Eijnden, E., et al. Density estimation by dual ascent of the log-likelihood. Communications in Mathematical Sciences 2010, 8, 217–233.

(16) Nüske, F.; Boninsegna, L.; Clementi, C. Coarse-graining molecular systems by spectral matching. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 151, 044116.

(25) Rezende, D.; Mohamed, S. Variational inference with normalizing flows. Interna15

[Page 16]

tional Conference on Machine Learning. 2015; pp 1530–1538.

(34) Ding, X.; Zhang, B. Computing Absolute Free Energy with Deep Generative Models. Biophys. J. 2021, 120, 195a.

(26) Papamakarios, G.; Nalisnick, E.; Rezende, D. J.; Mohamed, S.; Lakshminarayanan, B. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research 2021, 22, 1–64.

(35) Köhler, J.; Klein, L.; Noé, F. Equivariant flows: exact likelihood generative learning for symmetric densities. International Conference on Machine Learning. 2020; pp 5361–5370.

(27) Noé, F.; Olsson, S.; Köhler, J.; Wu, H. Boltzmann generators: Sampling equilibrium states of many-body systems with deep learning. Science 2019, 365, eaaw1147.

(36) Kovács, D. P.; Oord, C. V. D.; Kucera, J.; Allen, A. E.; Cole, D. J.; Ortner, C.; Csányi, G. Linear Atomic Cluster Expansion Force Fields for Organic Molecules: Beyond RMSE. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021, 17, 7696–7711.

(28) Gabriéu, M.; Rotskoff, G. M.; VandenEijnden, E. Adaptive Monte Carlo augmented with normalizing flows. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 2022,

(37) Thomas, N.; Smidt, T.; Kearnes, S.; Yang, L.; Li, L.; Kohlhoff, K.; Riley, P. Tensor field networks: Rotationand translation-equivariant neural networks for 3D point clouds. 2018,

(29) Li, S. H.; Dong, C. X.; Zhang, L.; Wang, L. Neural Canonical Transformation with Symplectic Flows. Phys. Rev. X 2020, 10,

(38) Klicpera, J.; Groß, J.; Günnemann, S. Directional Message Passing for Molecular Graphs. 2020, (39) Batzner, S.; Musaelian, A.; Sun, L.; Geiger, M.; Mailoa, J. P.; Kornbluth, M.; Molinari, N.; Smidt, T. E.; Kozinsky, B. E(3)-Equivariant Graph Neural Networks for Data-Efficient and Accurate Interatomic Potentials. 2021,

(30) Nicoli, K. A.; Nakajima, S.; Strodthoff, N.; Samek, W.; Müller, K. R.; Kessel, P. Asymptotically unbiased estimation of physical observables with neural samplers. Phys. Rev. E 2020, 101, 023304. (31) Liu, Q.; Xu, J.; Jiang, R.; Wong, W. H. Density estimation using deep generative neural networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2021, 118 .

(40) Unke, O. T.; Meuwly, M. PhysNet: A Neural Network for Predicting Energies, Forces, Dipole Moments, and Partial Charges. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019, 15, 3678–3693.

(32) Ding, X.; Zhang, B. DeepBAR: A Fast and Exact Method for Binding Free Energy Computation. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2021, 12, 2509–2515.

(41) Smith, J. S.; Isayev, O.; Roitberg, A. E. ANI-1: an extensible neural network potential with DFT accuracy at force field computational cost. Chem. Sci. 2017, 8, 3192–3203.

(33) Wirnsberger, P.; Ballard, A.; Papamakarios, G.; Abercrombie, S.; Racanière, S.; Pritzel, A.; Blundell, C., et al. Targeted free energy estimation via learned mappings. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2020, 153, 144112–144112.

(42) Chen, Y.; Krämer, A.; Charron, N. E.; Husic, B. E.; Clementi, C.; Noé, F. Machine learning implicit solvation for molecular dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 2021, 155,

[Page 17]

(43) Davtyan, A.; Schafer, N. P.; Zheng, W.; Clementi, C.; Wolynes, P. G.; Papoian, G. A. AWSEM-MD: Protein structure prediction using coarse-grained physical potentials and bioinformatically based local structure biasing. J. Phys. Chem. B 2012, 116, 8494–8503.

April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings. 2014. (52) Wu, H.; Köhler, J.; Noe, F. Stochastic Normalizing Flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2020; pp 5933–5944. (53) Nielsen, D.; Jaini, P.; Hoogeboom, E.; Winther, O.; Welling, M. Survae flows: Surjections to bridge the gap between vaes and flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2020.

(44) Joshi, S. Y.; Deshmukh, S. A. A review of advancements in coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations. Mol. Simul. 2021, 47, 786–803. (45) Marrink, S. J.; Risselada, H. J.; Yefimov, S.; Tieleman, D. P.; De Vries, A. H. The MARTINI Force Field: Coarse Grained Model for Biomolecular Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2007, 111, 7812–

(54) Wang, W.; Gómez-Bombarelli, R. Coarsegraining auto-encoders for molecular dynamics. npj Comput. Mater. 2019, 5, 1–9. (55) Wang, W.; Xu, M.; Cai, C.; Miller, B. K.; Smidt, T.; Wang, Y.; Tang, J.; GómezBombarelli, R. Generative CoarseGraining of Molecular Conformations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12176 2022,

(46) Souza, P. C. et al. Martini 3: a general purpose force field for coarse-grained molecular dynamics. Nat. Methods 2021 184 2021, 18, 382–388.

(56) Stieffenhofer, M.; Wand, M.; Bereau, T. Adversarial reverse mapping of equilibrated condensed-phase molecular structures. Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol. 2020, 1, 045014.

(47) Huang, C.-W.; Dinh, L.; Courville, A. Augmented normalizing flows: Bridging the gap between generative flows and latent variable models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07101 2020,

(57) Hyvärinen, A.; Dayan, P. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score matching. Journal of Machine Learning Research 2005, 6 .

(48) Chen, J.; Lu, C.; Chenli, B.; Zhu, J.; Tian, T. Vflow: More expressive generative flows with variational data augmentation. International Conference on Machine Learning. 2020; pp 1660–1669.

(58) Vincent, P. A Connection Between Score Matching and Denoising Autoencoders. Neural Computation 2011, 23, 1661– 1674, DOI: 10.1162/NECO_a_00142.

(49) Dinh, L.; Sohl-Dickstein, J.; Bengio, S. Density estimation using Real NVP. 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings. 2017.

(59) Song, Y.; Garg, S.; Shi, J.; Ermon, S. Sliced score matching: A scalable approach to density and score estimation. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. 2020; pp 574–584.

(50) Köhler, J.; Krämer, A.; Noé, F. Smooth Normalizing Flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2021.

(60) Song, Y.; Kingma, D. P. How to Train Your Energy-Based Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03288 2021,

(51) Kingma, D. P.; Welling, M. AutoEncoding Variational Bayes. 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada,

(61) Gutmann, M.; Hyvärinen, A. Noisecontrastive estimation: A new estimation principle for unnormalized statistical

[Page 18]

(70) Harmandaris, V.; Kalligiannaki, E.; Katsoulakis, M.; Plecháč, P. Path-space variational inference for non-equilibrium coarse-grained systems. J. Comput. Phys. 2016, 314, 355–383.

models. Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. 2010; pp 297–304. (62) Gao, R.; Nijkamp, E.; Kingma, D. P.; Xu, Z.; Dai, A. M.; Wu, Y. N. Flow contrastive estimation of energy-based models. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2020; pp 7518–7528.

(71) Schrödinger, LLC, The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 1.8. 2015.

(63) Cornish, R.; Caterini, A.; Deligiannidis, G.; Doucet, A. Relaxing bijectivity constraints with continuously indexed normalising flows. International Conference on Machine Learning. 2020; pp 2133– (64) Dinh, L.; Krueger, D.; Bengio, Y. Nice: Non-linear independent components estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8516 (65) Durkan, C.; Bekasov, A.; Murray, I.; Papamakarios, G. Neural spline flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2019; pp 7509–7520. (66) He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep residual learning for image recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016; pp 770–778. (67) Elfwing, S.; Uchibe, E.; Doya, K. SigmoidWeighted Linear Units for Neural Network Function Approximation in Reinforcement Learning. Neural networks : the official journal of the International Neural Network Society 2018, 107, 3–11. (68) Pérez-Hernández, G.; Paul, F.; Giorgino, T.; De Fabritiis, G.; Noé, F. Identification of slow molecular order parameters for Markov model construction. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 139, 07B604 1. (69) Schwantes, C. R.; Pande, V. S. Improvements in Markov state model construction reveal many non-native interactions in the folding of NTL9. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2013, 9, 2000–2009.
