[Page 1]

Disorder-mediated interactions target proteins to specific condensates Graphical abstract

Authors

Proteins are selectivly partitioned by different condensates

MED1IDR

Nancy De La Cruz, Prashant Pradhan, Reshma T. Veettil, Brooke A. Conti, Mariano Oppikofer, Benjamin R. Sabari

FUSIDR

Correspondence benjamin.sabari@utsouthwestern.edu IDRs are necesssary and sufficient for selective partitioning WT no IDR IDR

chimera

IDRs can retarget proteins and biochemical activity chimera kinase

kinase

phos

- phos

phos

In brief De La Cruz et al. perform a comparative analysis of proteins differentially partitioned by two condensates and find that distinct compositions arise through specific IDR-mediated interactions. These results demonstrate that disordermediated interactions can target proteins to specific condensates, enabling the spatial regulation of biochemistry within the cell.

Highlights

IDRs of FUS and MED1 both form condensates but partition different proteins

Differentially partitioned proteins contain IDRs with distinct sequence features

Distinct sequence features are necessary and sufficient for differential partitioning

Swapping IDRs retargets proteins and their biochemical activity to new condensates

De La Cruz et al., 2024, Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512 September 19, 2024 a 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2024.08.017

[Page 2]

Disorder-mediated interactions target proteins to specific condensates Nancy De La Cruz,1,3 Prashant Pradhan,1,3 Reshma T. Veettil,1,3 Brooke A. Conti,2 Mariano Oppikofer,2 and Benjamin R. Sabari1,4,* 1Laboratory of Nuclear Organization, Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive Biology Sciences, Division of Basic Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Molecular Biology, Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA 2Pfizer Centers for Therapeutic Innovation, Pfizer Inc., New York, NY 10016, USA 3These authors contributed equally 4Lead contact *Correspondence: benjamin.sabari@utsouthwestern.edu https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2024.08.017

SUMMARY

Selective compartmentalization of cellular contents is fundamental to the regulation of biochemistry. Although membrane-bound organelles control composition by using a semi-permeable barrier, biomolecular condensates rely on interactions among constituents to determine composition. Condensates are formed by dynamic multivalent interactions, often involving intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of proteins, yet whether distinct compositions can arise from these dynamic interactions is not known. Here, by comparative analysis of proteins differentially partitioned by two different condensates, we find that distinct compositions arise through specific IDR-mediated interactions. The IDRs of differentially partitioned proteins are necessary and sufficient for selective partitioning. Distinct sequence features are required for IDRs to partition, and swapping these sequence features changes the specificity of partitioning. Swapping whole IDRs retargets proteins and their biochemical activity to different condensates. Our results demonstrate that IDR-mediated interactions can target proteins to specific condensates, enabling the spatial regulation of biochemistry within the cell. INTRODUCTION Organizing cellular content into compartments of defined compositions is a fundamental mechanism for regulating cellular biochemistry. Membrane-bound organelles use semi-permeable membranes coupled with active transport to selectively organize biomolecules to regulate many essential biochemical processes. Membrane-less organelles, referred to here as condensates,1 also selectively organize biomolecules, but without a physical barrier. Consequently, condensate composition must be controlled by interactions among constituents.1–5 Condensates are formed by dynamic multivalent interactions among biomolecules with the best-studied examples arising from multivalent domain-ligand pairs or intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs).1,6–8 Although condensates produced by multivalent domain-ligand pairs are driven by the interactions between structured domains and their ligands, IDRs are regions of proteins that do not readily adopt stable tertiary structure.9,10 IDRs exist in an ensemble of interconverting structurally distinct conformations allowing them to engage in dynamic multivalent interactions.10,11 Specificity of condensate composition through domain-ligand interactions has been described and depends on structured interactions and the availability of free binding sites within the network of multivalent interactions.2,12–15 More recently, speci-

ficity of condensate composition directed by IDRs has been demonstrated.5,16 IDRs are prevalent within the proteome, with 30%–40% of the amino acid content of eukaryotic proteomes found within IDRs.17,18 Although these IDRs all share a lack of predicted stable tertiary structure, they encode a complex diversity of sequence features. Several distinct ‘‘molecular grammars’’ of IDRs have been defined, encompassing different amino acid composition and sequence configurations, suggesting that specificity can be encoded into IDR sequences in the absence of annotated domain-ligand pairs.4,16,19,20 Most studies have focused on dissecting the self-association of IDR-containing proteins or have performed candidate-based tests of individual proteins partitioning into a single IDR-mediated condensate. Recently, elegant work investigating the miscibility of pairs of IDR-mediated condensates revealed that co-condensing or segregating was dependent on the level of interplay between homotypic and heterotypic interactions and therefore likely encoded in IDR sequence.21,22 We previously published an unbiased capture of proteins selectively partitioned from a nuclear extract (NE) into reconstituted condensates formed by the IDR of Mediator of RNA polymerase II transcription subunit 1 (MED1IDR),16 which allowed us to identify factors relevant to MED1’s role in gene regulation. However, these studies were for a single condensate and did

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024 a 2024 Elsevier Inc. 3497 All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

[Page 3]

not allow us to investigate compositional specificity between different condensates. Here, we perform a comparative analysis of proteins partitioned into two distinct condensates formed by either MED1IDR or the IDR of fused in sarcoma (FUSIDR). We chose these two IDRs because they are both well-studied condensate-promoting IDRs from nuclear-localized proteins and yet have different sequence features that drive condensate formation by different molecular interactions (e.g., charge for MED116 and the amino acids Q, S, G, and Y for FUS19). The goal is not to comprehensively catalog the composition of endogenous condensates but to discover molecular rules underlying condensate specificity by identifying proteins differentially partitioned by two well-studied IDRs. To identify differentially partitioned proteins, we use two independent methods, one cell based and one cell free, for capturing partitioned proteins. Using quantitative proteomics, we identify proteins that are differentially partitioned by condensates formed by MED1IDR and FUSIDR. These differentially partitioned proteins are enriched for having their own IDRs, which are necessary and sufficient for the protein’s partitioning. Isolated IDRs from differentially partitioned proteins are highly selective for which condensate they partition into, suggesting that the specificity of partitioning is encoded within the sequence of IDRs. By analysis of IDR sequence features present in the differentially partitioned proteins enriched by these MED1IDR or FUSIDR condensates, we find distinct features that are necessary and sufficient for partitioning. Removing these features disrupts partitioning, and swapping these features changes the specificity of partitioning, leading to selective retargeting to the other condensate. Finally, switching a protein’s IDR for one with alternative features is sufficient to retarget the protein and its biochemical activity to a different condensate with consequences for the downstream function. These results demonstrate that distinct sequence features within IDRs are responsible for targeting proteins to specific condensates leading to condensates with distinct compositions and biochemical activities. We propose that IDR-mediated specificity is due to the various types of multivalent interactions established by amino acid compositions and distributions encoded within an IDR. In this context, IDRs can act as ‘‘zip codes’’ for sorting proteins into distinct condensates thereby regulating cellular biochemistry by selective compartmentalization. RESULTS Both FUSIDR and MED1IDR form condensates but have distinct sequence features MED1 and FUS both contain terminal disordered regions that are necessary and sufficient for condensate formation.3,19,23,24 We focus on the C-terminal IDR of MED1, which requires charged amino acids for condensate formation,16 and the N-terminal IDR of FUS, which requires aromatic residues for condensate formation19 (Figures 1A and 1B). We focus on the low-complexity region of the FUS IDR (1–214) because this region is sufficient to promote condensate formation and confer function when fused to other proteins.3,4,23,25–37 Both IDRs have equivalent disorder predictions and phase separation capacity predictions by multiple algorithms (Figures 1B and S1A). As expected,3,23,24

3498 Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024

mEGFP-tagged recombinant MED1IDR and FUSIDR both readily form condensates in vitro (Figure 1C). Despite both IDRs forming condensates, they are strikingly different in their amino acid composition and sequence patterning. Although MED1IDR contains relatively high fractions of basic (K and R) and acidic (E and D) amino acids patterned into blocks, FUSIDR contains relatively high fractions of Y and Q, which are highly patterned into repeats along the IDR (Figures 1B, 1D, and S1A; Table S1). Together, these differences suggest that the two IDRs likely create distinct chemical environments and therefore might partition distinct sets of proteins. To determine whether MED1IDR or FUSIDR create compositionally distinct condensates, we first investigated whether they interact with one another. To this end, we utilized the U2OS 2-6-3 cell line that contains a large array of lac operator (LacO) sequences integrated into a specific genomic locus (referred to here as Lac array cells),39 which can be used to localize high concentrations of any lac repressor (LacI)-fused protein at the LacO array locus. This strategy has been used by many to interrogate IDR-mediated interactions in cells.5,16,40,41 We transfected Lac array cells with cyan fluorescent protein (CFP)-LacI fused to either MED1IDR or FUSIDR and then co-transfected mCherry fused to either MED1IDR or FUSIDR. The expectation is that these IDRs will self-associate but will not associate with each other. Relative to the signal detected in the control CFP-LacI focus, MED1IDR was enriched only in CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci, and FUSIDR was only enriched in CFP-LacI-FUSIDR (Figures 1E and 1F). Neither IDR showed enrichment in the control CFP-LacI (Figure S1B). To ensure that full-length MED1 or FUS were behaving the same as their IDRs in isolation, we performed immunofluorescence for endogenous FUS or MED1 in the context of CFP-LacI-MED1IDR or CFP-LacI-FUSIDR and found that neither are enriched at the others Lac focus (Figures S1C and S1D). These results demonstrate that the chemical environment established by either IDR is distinct, prompting us to perform a comparative analysis of proteins differentially partitioned by these two condensates. Strategies for unbiased purification of proteins partitioned into condensates To test whether MED1IDR and FUSIDR condensates partition different sets of proteins, we used two different methods followed by quantitative proteomics. The first is a cell-based method relying on proximity biotinylation by the engineered peroxidase APEX242,43 (Figure 2A), and the second is a cellfree method relying on condensate reconstitution within a NE (Figure 2B). Although both strategies have inherent potential sources of false positives, we reasoned that using two orthogonal methods and identifying the overlap between the two would yield high-confidence results. The goal is not to comprehensively catalog the composition of complex endogenous condensates but to use these simplified and controllable IDR-mediated condensates to discover molecular rules that enable differential partitioning and compositional control of condensates. In the cell-based strategy, we used the Lac array cells combined with APEX2 proximity biotinylation to label proteins in situ that partition into the Lac array focus composed of either MED1IDR or FUSIDR relative to a control. To do this, we integrated

[Page 4]

Figure 1. IDRs of FUS and MED1 both form condensates, but with distinct chemical features (A) Consensus MobiDB disorder prediction plots38 for MED1 and FUS, IDRs are shaded orange or violet. 0 corresponds to lowest prediction of disorder, and 1 corresponds to highest prediction of disorder. (B) Parametric heatmap for MED1 and FUS IDR regions representing a log2 of enrichment ratio relative to each other. (C) mEGFP-tagged recombinant protein. Droplets in 10% polyethylene glycol (PEG)-8000. Scale bars, 2 mm. (D) Heatmaps representing Q, FYW, KR, and DE amino acid content for IDR regions. (E) Representative images of mCherry-MED1IDR or mCherry-FUSIDR transfected together with either CFP-LacI-MED1IDR, CFP-LacI-FUSIDR, or CFP-LacI (no IDR) (see Figure S1B). Scale bars, 5 mm. Inset scale bars, 1 mm. (F) Boxplot (min-max) of partition coefficients for experiments in (E). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR CFP-LacI control, n = 8. See also Figure S1 and Table S1.

a doxycycline (dox)-inducible construct to express mEGFPLacI-APEX2 fused to either MED1IDR, FUSIDR, or lacking an IDR as a control into Lac array cells (Figure 2A). The addition of these modules did not significantly impact the predicted phase separation of either IDR (Figure S2A). Although we and others have used the strategy of LacI-IDR fusions in Lac array cells to investigate candidates,5,16,40,41,44 coupling this approach to APEX2-mediated proximity biotinylation provides an unbiased profile of partitioned proteins (Figure 2A). Initial drug selection of piggyBac integration led to a population with large distributions of construct expression. To reduce heterogeneity and select cells with moderate expression levels and high signal enrichment at the Lac focus, we isolated clones by performing single-cell dilutions (STAR Methods). This yielded populations where the brightest GFP and streptavidin signal was at the Lac focus (Figures S2B and S2C). For MED1IDR, we were unable to

completely remove cells with minor signal mis-localized to nucleoli, but we were able to lower the fraction of those cells within the population (Figures S2B and S2C). Western blot analysis of the isolated cell lines after dox induction showed that the Lac array cell lines for MED1IDR and FUSIDR constructs were expressed at equivalent levels and the control construct was expressed at lower levels (Figure S2D). To test whether proteins were being preferentially biotinylated at the Lac array focus in our engineered cell lines, we performed the biotinylation assay (STAR Methods) followed by staining cells with a Rhodamine Red-X-conjugated neutravidin. For all three cell lines the brightest neutravidin enrichment was at the Lac array focus (Figure 2C), which we did not observe in the absence of biotin-phenol, the biotin donor for APEX2 (Figure S2E). Quantification of neutravidin signal in the nucleus showed a significant enrichment at GFP-positive Lac foci (Figure 2D), demonstrating

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024 3499

[Page 5]

Figure 2. Condensates of MED1IDR and FUSIDR partition different proteins (A) Schematic of the in situ Lac-APEX method (cell-based method). (B) Schematic of the in vitro extract method (cell-free method). (C) Representative images of cell lines expressing mEGFP-LacI-APEX2 noIDR, MED1IDR, or FUSIDR construct at the Lac-array locus (top row), biotin signal visualized by neutravidin-Rhodamine Red-X (bottom row) with and without biotin-phenol incubation (see Figure S2D). Scale bars, 5 mm. (D) Bar chart quantification of neutravidin signal in (C) with and without biotin-phenol incubation for each cell line expressing mEGFP-LacI-APEX2 noIDR, MED1IDR, or FUSIDR. p values represent Mann-Whitney test, n = 10. (E) Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gel of nuclear extract (NE), pellet fractions, and recombinant purified MED1IDR, or FUSIDR. (F) Schematic of overlap analysis. (G) Heatmap of pellet/supernatant (P/S) percentile rank (see STAR Methods) for uniquely partitioned proteins and overlapped proteins of MED1IDR and FUSIDR condensates. This heatmap is divided into three classes, differentially partitioned proteins for MED1IDR condensates (72), differentially partitioned proteins for FUSIDR condensates (61), and commonly partitioned proteins (non-DP). (legend continued on next page)

3500 Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024

[Page 6]

that proteins at the various Lac array foci were being biotinylated. Immunoblots of whole-cell lysates from the three cell lines with or without biotin-phenol treatment showed that many proteins are biotinylated (Figure S2F). These results demonstrate that localizing APEX2 to the LacO array by direct fusion to LacIFUSIDR or LacI-MED1IDR is a viable strategy for unbiased capture of partitioned proteins. In the cell-free strategy, we use the fact that condensates are denser than their surroundings and can be isolated by centrifugation (Figure 2B). We previously demonstrated that this strategy was able to isolate proteins from soluble NEs partitioned into reconstituted MED1IDR condensates.16 Here, we repeat these experiments alongside experiments with FUSIDR for comparative analysis. Using fluorescent protein tagged recombinant purified MED1IDR or FUSIDR we reconstituted condensates in a soluble NE isolated from U2OS cells (STAR Methods). Proteins from the extract that partitioned into these condensates were recovered by centrifugation and collection of the pellet (Figure 2B). Inspection of the total NE compared with the pellet fraction and the purified recombinant protein (IDR) by SDS-PAGE revealed that many distinct proteins are partitioned by either MED1IDR or FUSIDR condensates (Figure 2E). Taken together, these results demonstrate that both our cell-based and cellfree strategies are viable methods for unbiased isolation of proteins partitioned by two different condensates. Proteomic analysis reveals the enrichment of distinct functional categories We next performed quantitative proteomics analyses on the proteins isolated by our two methods. For the cell-based proximity biotinylation method, we used the stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) by supplementing heavy arginine and lysine in the media of cells expressing the control, whereas both FUSIDR and MED1IDR cell lines were grown in light isotope conditions (Figure S2G). Cells were subject to the biotinylation protocol followed by NE preparation (STAR Methods). Light and heavy extracts were mixed at a 1:1 ratio followed by streptavidin pull-down, stringent washing, and elution (STAR Methods; Figure S2G). Two independent replicates of SILAC data were collected for both FUSIDR and MED1IDR. Analysis of the SILAC data provided quantitative light over heavy ratios for all measured proteins, allowing each IDR to be compared with the same internal standard (control cells). For the cell-free method, condensates were reconstituted in a soluble NE, and the extract was fractionated by centrifugation into a supernatant and pellet (Figure S2G). For each IDR, supernatant and pellet fractions were collected in triplicate. Samples were individually labeled using a 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) post-tryptic isobaric labeling strategy, and the three supernatant and three pellet fractions of each IDR were mixed and analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to provide quantitative measurements of partitioning (STAR Methods; Figure S2G). Analysis of the TMT data provided

quantitative pellet over supernatant ratios that defined partition ratios for all measured proteins from the extract. To identify partitioned proteins of high confidence, we performed an overlap analysis of all replicates from both methods and then filtered for differentially partitioned proteins by comparing relative partition ratios from the cell-free method. We considered proteins as partitioned in the cell-based datasets if they had a light/heavy ratio >2 and in the cell-free datasets if they were within the top 10% of pellet/supernatant ratio values (Figure 2F). Overlap analysis of all experimental datasets defined 91 proteins from MED1IDR and 93 proteins from FUSIDR that were partitioned in both methods and all replicates (Figure S2H; Table S2). To identify differentially partitioned proteins, which were preferentially found in one condensate over the other, we next filtered our candidates using the partition ratios collected by the cell-free method. By assuming a partitioned protein must be in the top 10% of identified proteins by partition ratio, we find a group of 72 proteins preferentially partitioned into MED1IDR condensates and 61 proteins preferentially partitioned into FUSIDR condensates (Figure 2G; Table S2). These identified proteins are preferentially partitioned into their respective condensate and have been identified by multiple replicates from two orthogonal purification methods. Using antibodies against candidate proteins preferentially partitioned by MED1IDR (CTR9) or FUSIDR (p300), we validated their high degree of enrichment for their respective condensate using an independent replicate of the cell-free experiment followed by immunoblot (Figure 2H) and an independent cell-based experiment followed by immunofluorescence (Figures 2I and 2J). We do note immunoblot signal for p300 in the MED1IDR pellet above the background, but this signal is minor relative to the band in FUSIDR pellet, demonstrating a preference in partitioning. To relate these results with full-length proteins, we performed co-staining of MED1 with either FUS or CTR9 and FUS with either MED1 or EWSR1 (Figures S2J–S2M). Although we do not observe full co-localization of MED1 with CTR9 or FUS with EWSR1, the overlap between foci of proteins identified to co-partition (MED1 vs. CTR9 or FUS vs. EWSR1) is significantly higher than overlap with the control (Figures S2K and S2M). Taken together, these results confirm that our dual proteomic approach has identified candidates that are selectively partitioned. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of these differentially partitioned proteins revealed distinct pathways enriched by the two condensates (Figure S2I). The GO category enrichments for MED1IDR condensates agreed with the proteins previously identified by semi-quantitative analysis of extract pelleting,16 showing enrichments for positive regulators of RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II). FUSIDR condensates showed enrichment for chromatin assembly factors and RNA processing machinery in agreement with the RNA and chromatin binding properties of the FUS protein.45,46 These results demonstrate that condensates formed by two different IDRs can capture functionally distinct sets of proteins.

(H) Immunoblot of pellet fraction of indicated sample with indicated antibody. (I) Immunofluorescence using the indicated antibody. Scale bars, 5 mm. (J) Quantification of (I). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR CFP-LacI control. See also Figure S2 and Table S2.

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024 3501

[Page 7]

MED1IDR partitioned % with feature

Intrinsically disorderd region (IDR) GATA zinc finger (PF00320) MTA R1 domain (PF17226) zinc-finger C2H2-type (PF16622) BAH domain (PF01426) ELM2 domain (PF01448)

Pfam domains

Pfam domains

Fisher’s exact test

0 5 10 -log10(p-value)

FUSIDR partitioned

0

Fisher’s exact test

% with feature

0 5 10 15 -log10(p-value)

0

Intrinsically disorderd region (IDR) RNA recognition motif (PF00076) CBX family C-term motif (PF17218) DEAD box helicase (PF00270) Chromo domain (PF00385) CBF/Mak21 family (PF03914)

50 100 % of group

50 100 % of group

CFP mCherry

∆IDR

?

IDR

∆IDR IDR

IDR

SPT6

CDK11B ∆IDR

IDR

∆IDR

IDR

∆IDR

HTATSF1 ∆IDR

CFP-LacI-MED1IDR partition coefficient (signal in/out of lac focus)

CFP-LacI-MED1IDR + mCherry-

4

SPT6

CDK11B

HTATSF1 5

20

8

15

6

10

4

5

2

3 2 1 0

0

∆

R R ID ID

0

DR DR ∆I I

R R ID ID

∆

CFP-LacI-FUSIDR + mCherry-

∆IDR IDR

?

CFP mCherry

EWSR1 ∆IDR

IDR

p300 ∆IDR

IDR

KHDR1 ∆IDR

p300

EWSR1

IDR

CFP-LacI-FUSIDR partition coefficient (signal in/out of lac focus)

10

8

4

8

6

KHDR1

3

6 4

2 4

2

1

2 0

0

DR DR ∆I I

0

∆

R R ID ID

DR IDR

∆I

Figure 3. IDRs are necessary and sufficient for partitioning (A) Bar plots showing (left) enrichment of intrinsically disordered regions and Pfam domains in proteins differentially partitioned by MED1IDR (MED1IDR-partitioned) compared with proteome (p < 0.0001), (right) the percentage of MED1IDR-partitioned proteins that contain the indicated feature. (B) Same as (A) but for FUSIDR-partitioned proteins. (C) Schematic of experiment (left). Representative images of mCherry-IDR or delta-IDR fusions of candidates identified in MED1IDR dataset tested for partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR focus (right). Scale bars, 1 mm. (D) Boxplot (min-max) of partition coefficients for experiments in (C), n = 5. p values, two-tailed unpaired t test. (E) Same as (C) but for FUSIDR. (F) Same as (D) but for FUSIDR. See also Figure S3.

Differentially partitioned proteins are enriched for IDRs that drive partitioning We next sought to understand the specificity of these differentially partitioned proteins. We reasoned that the differentially partitioned proteins would have a domain or region in common which enables their common compartmentalization. We performed a Fisher’s exact test on all known structured domains using the Pfam database47 and included as an entry IDRs as defined by metapredict.48 This analysis revealed that, relative to Pfam domains, IDRs are the most statistically significant feature enriched in the two groups of differentially partitioned proteins (Figures 3A and 3B). Although some Pfam domains

3502 Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024

showed statistically significant enrichments, none were present in more than 10% of differentially partitioned proteins, whereas 85% and 92% of proteins differentially partitioned by MED1IDR or FUSIDR, respectively, contained an IDR of their own (Figures 3A, 3B, and S3A). These analyses suggest that IDR-mediated interactions might be involved in differential partitioning. To test whether IDRs or other portions of partitioned proteins were driving partitioning, we selected three proteins from each group and tested whether their terminal IDRs were necessary and sufficient for partitioning into their respective condensate. For the MED1IDR condensate, we selected the proteins HTATSF1, CDK11B, and SPT6, and for the FUSIDR condensate,

[Page 8]

Figure 4. IDRs are selective in their partitioning (A) Schematic of experiment in (B). (B) Representative images of mCherry-IDR fusions (top row) from both datasets tested for partitioning in CFP-LacI-MED1IDR focus (bottom row). Scale bars, 1 mm. (C) Boxplot (min-max) of partition coefficients for experiments in (B). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 5. (D) Schematic of experiment in (E). (E) Representative images of mCherry-IDR fusions (top row) from both datasets tested for partitioning in CFP-LacI-FUSIDR (bottom row) focus. Scale bars, 1 mm. (F) Boxplot (min-max) of partition coefficients for experiments in (E). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 5. (G) Schematic of experiment in (H). (H) Representative images of cells transfected with mCherry-p300IDR (left) and miRFP670-CDK11BIDR (middle) to test for partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR focus (right). Scale bars, 1 mm. (I) Graph showing line profile of relative mCherry and miRFP670 signal centered at CFP foci from experiments in (H), n = 5. (legend continued on next page)

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024 3503

[Page 9]

we selected the proteins EWSR1, p300, and KHDR1. These proteins were selected as representative proteins from the different Gene Ontology (GO) categories enriched by either condensate (Figure S2I). Each of the selected proteins contains a terminal IDR and other protein domains. We divided each protein into two parts, the terminal IDR (IDR) and the rest of the protein (DIDR) (Table S1). We then expressed these parts fused to mCherry in Lac array cells with either CFP-LacI-MED1IDR or CFP-LacI-FUSIDR. Strikingly, for all six examples, the IDR of the differentially partitioned protein showed high partitioning into its respective LacI-IDR focus, whereas the DIDR was unable to partition (Figures 3C–3F, S3B, and S3C). These results demonstrate that for these six examples tested, the terminal IDR tested is necessary and sufficient for partitioning. IDRs from differentially partitioned proteins are highly selective Given that IDRs are necessary and sufficient to partition into condensates, we next asked whether these IDRs are selective for which condensate they partition into. Using the Lac array cell line, we tested three IDRs from MED1IDR-partitioned proteins and three IDRs from FUSIDR-partitioned proteins for their ability to partition into both MED1IDR and FUSIDR LacI foci. The IDRs from MED1IDR partitioned proteins (CTR9, SPT6, and CDK11B) or FUSIDR-partitioned proteins (EWSR1, p300, and KHDR1) showed striking selectivity, partitioning into their respective CFP-LacI focus but showing no enrichment or depletion of signal at the other focus (Figures 4A–4F, S4A, and S4B). To confirm these results with full-length proteins, we investigated the partitioning of immunofluorescence signal of endogenous candidates into condensates composed of full-length MED1 or FUS. In agreement with data from the Lac array using IDRs, we found a higher overlap of endogenous CDK11 with MED1 puncta than with FUS and a higher overlap of endogenous EWSR1 with FUS puncta than MED1 (Figures S4C and S4D). These experiments demonstrate that in pair-wise comparisons, IDRs can be highly selective, partitioning into their target condensate and being excluded from others. Because our previous experiments compared the partitioning of single IDRs transfected with either CFP-LacI fused to MED1IDR or FUSIDR, we next sought to test whether the same degree of selectivity was observed when two different IDRs were present in the same cell. To do this we added a third color to our assays by using the far-red fluorescent protein miRFP670, allowing us to transfect cells with CFP-LacI fused to either MED1IDR or FUSIDR together with mCherry-IDR #1 and miRFP670-IDR #2 (Figures 4G and 4J). Using three-color imaging, we could then determine to what extent IDR#1 and IDR#2 partitioned into the same LacI focus. We first performed this experiment with IDRs of p300 and CDK11B, selective for FUSIDR and MED1IDR, respectively (Figures 4G–4L, S4E, and S4F). Strikingly, the IDRs showed selectivity, corroborating our

previous results with pair-wise comparisons. Given these are in the same cell, we performed line profile analysis to quantify relative signal enrichment within the same CFP-LacI focus. This analysis showed that p300IDR and CDK11BIDR were partitioned into FUSIDR and MED1IDR LacI foci, respectively, but had little to no signal enrichment over background in the other LacI focus (Figures 4I and 4L). We repeated this three-color experiment with multiple pairs of IDRs with similar results (Figures S4G–S4O). We could also switch the fluorophores mCherry and miRFP670 with no effect on selectivity (Figures S4H, S4K, and S4M). Taken together, these results demonstrate that information encoded within IDRs enables specificity and selectivity for condensatemediated partitioning. Differentially partitioned IDRs have distinct sequence features required for partitioning Given the specific and selective partitioning of IDRs for MED1 or FUS condensates, we next sought to identify whether these two groups of IDRs have distinct sequence features that could reveal the molecular rules governing their differential partitioning. We performed an analysis of three groups of IDRs: (1) IDRs from proteins differentially partitioned by MED1IDR condensates (MED1), (2) IDRs from proteins differentially partitioned by FUSIDR condensates (FUS), and (3) all IDRs identified in the proteome (IDRome). We were interested in identifying sequence features enriched in IDRs from the MED1 group or FUS group relative to the other two groups. Through this analysis (Table S3), we found that IDRs from both MED1 and FUS groups were enriched for overall fraction of charged residues (FCR) and fraction of basic residues (KR), relative to the IDRome (Figure 5A). IDRs from the MED1 group were also enriched for fraction of acidic residues (DE) and measures of charge segregation (kappa, blocks, and SCD) relative to both IDRs in the FUS group and IDRome (Figures 5B and S5A). This observation matches our published results that MED1IDR condensates selectively partitioned proteins with IDRs containing patterned blocks of acidic and basic residues.16 The high FCR for the FUS group is driven by enrichment in basic amino acids, whereas IDRs from the MED1 group have an enrichment for both basic and acid amino acids, with a preference for acidic amino acids. This is evident in the downshift in the distribution of isoelectric points for the IDRs in the MED1 group and the upshift in the distribution for the IDRs in the FUS group, relative to the IDRome (Figure S5B). The high basic content in the FUS group is expected given the known interaction of the N-terminal IDR of FUS with RGG regions.19 We note that although both FUS and MED1 groups have an overall higher fraction of basic residues, the patterning of charge is distinct between the two groups, with the MED1 group having a higher local density of charge and the FUS group having a more distributed charge. Our previous work has shown that charge patterning rather than composition is crucial for partitioning into MED1IDR

(J) Schematic of experiment in (K). (K) Representative images of cells transfected with mCherry-p300IDR (left) and miRFP670-CDK11BIDR (middle) to test for partitioning into CFP-LacI-FUSIDR focus (right). Scale bars, 1 mm. (L) Graph showing line profile of relative mCherry and miRFP670 signal centered at CFP foci from experiments in (K), n = 5. See also Figure S4.

3504 Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024

[Page 10]

Figure 5. Amino acid features enriched in differentially partitioned proteins are required for partitioning (A) Comparative analysis shows partitioned IDRs are enriched for fraction of charge residues (FCR) and basic residues. (B) Comparative analysis shows MED1IDR-partitioned IDRs are enriched for acidic amino acid fraction and kappa. (C) Comparative analysis shows FUSIDR-partitioned IDRs are enriched for P, Q, K, R, and Y residues. (D) Representative images of mCherry-CDK11BIDR WT or mutant E to A (top row) tested for partitioning in CFP-LacI-MED1IDR focus (bottom row). Scale bars, 1 mm. (E) Boxplot (min-max) of partition coefficient for experiments in (D). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 5. (F) Representative images of mCherry-EWSR1IDR WT or mutant PQ to A (top row) tested for partitioning in CFP-LacI-FUSIDR focus (bottom row). Scale bars, 1 mm. (G) Boxplot (min-max) of partition coefficient for experiments in (F). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 5. See also Figure S5 and Table S3.

condensates.16 This explains why full-length FUS with its RGG regions does not partition into MED1IDR condensates (Figures S1C, S2J, and S2K). Taken together, these results demonstrate that the proteins selectively partitioned by two condensates have distinct amino acid signatures encoded in their IDRs. IDRs from the FUS group were enriched for amino acids (PQKRY) known to interact with tyrosines and glutamines, respectively, through p-mediated interactions49 or hydrogen bonding,50 relative to IDRs from the MED1 group and the IDRome (Figure 5C). Given the experimental literature on FUSIDR interactions with the basic RGG regions of FUS,19 we expected to find enrichments for basic amino acids in IDRs partitioned by FUSIDR. The proline and glutamine enrichments agree with NMR studies of phase-separated samples,51,52 which have shown that the d+ of these residues interacts with tyrosine residues. Both the glutamine(amino)-aromatic interaction53–55 and proline(CH)-aromatic interaction56,57 have also been reported

in other contexts. In summary, the amino acid features that distinguished the IDRs from the two groups were a relatively high fraction of highly segregated charged residues for IDRs partitioned into MED1IDR and a relatively high proline and glutamine fraction for IDRs partitioned into FUSIDR. Interestingly, when we looked at the proteins that were found partitioned into both MED1IDR and FUSIDR we see evidence of both sequence features being enriched on the IDRs of those proteins relative to the IDRome (Figures S5D and S5E). This analysis suggests that sequence features encoded throughout the length of the IDR influence the specificity and selectivity of partitioning. Given the identified sequence features from the group analysis, we analyzed the seven IDRs tested experimentally for their acidic, proline, and glutamine amino acid content. In agreement with our analysis of the group, the four experimentally validated MED1-partitioning IDRs were relatively enriched for acidic amino acids, whereas the three experimentally validated FUS-partitioning IDRs were relatively enriched for proline and glutamine

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024 3505

[Page 11]

Figure 6. Swapping amino acid features changes condensate specificity (A) Schematic of expected results of changing sequence features of SPT6IDR on partitioning. (B) Representative images of mCherry-SPT6IDR WT or charge-to-PQ variant (top row) tested for partitioning into either CFP-LacI-MED1IDR or CFP-LacI-FUSIDR (bottom row). Scale bars, 1 mm. (C) Boxplot (min-max) of partition coefficient for experiments in (B). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 7. (D) Schematic of expected results of changing sequence features of EWSR1IDR on partitioning. (E) Representative images of mCherry-EWSR1IDR WT or PQY-to-charge variant (top row) tested for partitioning into either CFP-LacI-MED1IDR or CFP-LacIFUSIDR (bottom row). Scale bars, 1 mm. (F) Boxplot (min-max) of partition coefficient for experiments in (E). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 7. See also Figure S6.

(Figure S5C). To test whether the identified differentiating sequence features were required for IDR partitioning, we made substitution mutants and tested the effect on partitioning in Lac array cells. From the MED1IDR group, we mutated all glutamic acids (E) to alanine (A) in the IDR of CDK11B. Removal of glutamic acid residues ablated CDK11BIDR partitioning into CFPLacI-MED1IDR foci (Figures 5D, 5E, and S5F). From the FUSIDR group, we mutated all proline and glutamine residues to alanine in the IDR of EWSR1. Removal of proline and glutamine ablated EWSR1IDR partitioning into CFP-LacI-FUSIDR (Figures 5F, 5G, and S5G). These results demonstrate that the sequence features that distinguish IDRs of differentially partitioned proteins are required for their selective partitioning. Swapping sequence features changes IDR specificity Given the requirement for specific sequence features, we next asked whether these features enriched by the two classes of IDRs were sufficient for selective partitioning. To test this, we de-

3506 Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024

signed synthetic versions of natural IDRs from either the FUSIDR or MED1IDR partitioned groups by swapping the required features from its IDR class for the features of the other class. If these sequence features were the drivers of specificity, then we should be able to predictively switch the condensate to which the IDR is targeted (Figures 6A and 6D). We focused on the IDRs of SPT6 (MED1IDR-partitioned) and EWSR1 (FUSIDR-partitioned). For SPT6IDR, we swapped basic and acidic residues for proline and glutamine residues (Figure S6A; Table S1) to create the charge-to-PQ variant, which we predicted would change its partitioning from MED1IDR to FUSIDR condensate (Figure 6A). By comparing wild-type (WT) SPT6IDR with the charge-to-PQ variant in Lac array cells expressing either CFP-LacI-MED1IDR or CFP-LacI-FUSIDR, we found that while WT SPT6IDR was partitioned by MED1IDR and not FUSIDR, this specificity was reversed for the feature-swapped variant that was partitioned by FUSIDR and not by MED1IDR (Figures 6B, 6C, and S6C). For EWSR1IDR, we swapped proline, glutamine, and tyrosine

[Page 12]

Figure 7. Swapping IDRs redirects biochemistry (A) Schematic of CDK11 partitioning. (B) Representative images of immunofluorescence using an antibody for RNA polymerase II subunit RBP1 specific to CTD in CFP-LacI no IDR, -MED1IDR, or -FUSIDR foci in Lac array cells. (Right) Boxplot (min-max), p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 5. (C) Representative images of immunofluorescence using a phospho-specific antibody for serine 5 phosphorylation (S5ph) of the CTD of RNA polymerase II (top row) within control CFP-LacI no IDR, -MED1IDR, or -FUSIDR foci in Lac array cells (bottom row). Scale bars, 5 mm. (Left) Boxplot (min-max) of S5ph signal enrichment within indicated LacI foci, p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 7. (Right) Boxplot (min-max) of S5ph signal enrichment normalized to the average signal enrichment of total RNA Pol II from experiments presented in (B), p values represent unpaired t test, n = 7. (D) Schematic of predicted partitioning and consequence to phosphorylation of CDK11 kinase domain lacking its N-terminal IDR (CDK11DIDR or CDK11kinase) or of CDK11 chimera constructed by fusing CDK11kinase and p300IDR. (E) Representative images of immunofluorescence using phospho-specific antibodies for serine 5 phosphorylation (S5ph) of the CTD of RNA polymerase II (middle row), for Lac array cells expressing mCherry-no IDR, CDK11, CDK11 chimera, or kinase-dead (KD) chimera (top row) within CFP-LacI-FUSIDR foci (bottom row). Whole-cell scale bars, 5 mm. Inset scale bars, 1 mm. (legend continued on next page)

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024 3507

[Page 13]

residues for basic and acidic residues (Figure S6B; Table S1) to create the PQY-to-charge variant, which we predicted would change its partitioning from FUSIDR to MED1IDR condensate (Figure 6D). By comparing WT EWSR1IDR with the PQYto-charge variant in Lac array cells expressing either CFPLacI-MED1IDR or CFP-LacI-FUSIDR, we found that while WT EWSR1IDR was partitioned by FUSIDR and not MED1IDR, this specificity was reversed for the feature-swapped variant that was partitioned by MED1IDR and not FUSIDR (Figures 6E, 6F, and S6D). These results demonstrate that the sequence features enriched in the differentially partitioned IDRs are sufficient to drive specificity. Swapping IDRs redirects biochemistry The expected functional outcome of selective compartmentalization is the regulation of biochemistry. For instance, the co-partitioning of an enzyme with one among multiple potential substrates will lead to preferential activity on the co-partitioned substrate within the condensate. To test this hypothesis, we focused on CDK11, a kinase that was selectively partitioned by MED1IDR but not FUSIDR condensates. CDK11 is a transcription-associated kinase58 that phosphorylates, among other substrates, RNA Pol II at multiple positions on its C-terminal domain (CTD).58–60 RNA Pol II is known to partition into both FUSIDR4,61 and MED1IDR62 condensates, enabling us to ask whether the selective partitioning of CDK11 by MED1IDR leads to a measurable difference in RNA Pol II phosphorylation (Figure 7A). We first confirmed that RNA Pol II is partitioned into both MED1IDR and FUSIDR condensates using the Lac array experiment (Figure 7B). Despite both MED1IDR and FUSIDR Lac foci partitioning RNA Pol II, only MED1IDR partitions CDK11 (Figure 2G), prompting us to investigate the phosphorylation status of RNA Pol II in the different LacI foci. Immunofluorescence using phospho-specific antibodies for one of the CDK11 targets on RNA Pol II CTD58 showed a significant enrichment in MED1IDR foci relative to both control or FUSIDR foci, whereas FUSIDR foci did not show an enrichment relative to the control (Figure 7C). This increase in signal for phosphorylated RNA Pol II was not due merely to MED1IDR foci having more RNA Pol II partitioned because normalizing the phospho-specific antibody signal to total RNA Pol II antibody signal still showed significantly higher signal for MED1IDR relative to FUSIDR foci (Figure 7C). These results demonstrate that selective condensate composition can regulate biochemistry within the cell. Having shown that the IDRs of differentially partitioned proteins are necessary and sufficient for selective partitioning, we next sought to test whether synthetically targeting CDK11 to FUSIDR foci would be sufficient to redirect phosphorylation of RNA Pol II. We reasoned that swapping the IDR of CDK11 with an IDR from a FUS-partitioned protein would cause the CDK11

chimera to partition into FUSIDR condensates. We designed the CDK11 chimera by replacing the N-terminal IDR of CDK11 with the C-terminal IDR of p300 (a FUSIDR-partitioned protein), which we then ectopically expressed as an mCherry fusion together with CFP-LacI-FUSIDR in Lac array cells. As controls, we also expressed mCherry alone (noIDR), full-length CDK11, and the chimera with mutations to the kinase domain rendering it catalytically dead (kinase-dead chimera) (Figure 7D). Although the fulllength CDK11 did not preferentially partition into the FUSIDR foci, the chimera (CDK11-p300IDR) did preferentially partition into the FUSIDR foci leading to an increase in RNA Pol II phosphorylation (Figures 7E and 7F). Although the increase in RNA Pol II phosphorylation may be due to an indirect consequence of retargeting CDK11, we find that the increase in phosphorylation is dependent on CDK11’s kinase activity because expression of kinase-dead chimera did not lead to a significant increase in phosphorylation relative to the control. The kinase-dead chimera was also preferentially partitioned into FUSIDR foci but did not lead to an increase in RNA Pol II phosphorylation (Figures 7E and 7F). These results suggest that IDRs are sufficient to determine into which condensate a protein is targeted and that differential targeting can alter cellular biochemistry. Given that we could retarget CDK11 by swapping out its IDR, we next asked whether this had functional consequences for the transcription of the genomic locus (Figure 7G). CDK11 activity and RNA Pol II phosphorylation are associated with positive regulation of transcription.58 The Lac array cells have a reporter gene embedded within the Lac array encoding for a transcript containing a rabbit beta-globin intron-exon module.39 We designed FISH probes that hybridize to this transcript and performed RNA-FISH in cells expressing CFP-LacI-FUSIDR and full-length CDK11, CKD11 chimera, and the kinase-dead chimera. As we observed in the previous experiment, FL CDK11 did not partition, but both chimera and chimera kinasedead did partition into FUSIDR foci relative to the mCherry-only control (Figures 7H and 7I). RNA-FISH for the reporter transcription revealed an increase in transcription relative to the control only with the CDK11 chimera, which partitions into FUSIDR foci and enhances phosphorylation of RNA Pol II (Figures 7H and 7I). Although this effect on transcription could be due to an indirect consequence of retargeting CDK11, we find that the effect on transcription is dependent on the retargeting of CDK11’s kinase activity because neither expression of fulllength CDK11 nor kinase-dead chimera showed a significant increase in FISH signal relative to the control (Figures 7H and 7I). These results demonstrate that IDR-driven selective partitioning can alter transcriptional activity in cells, highlighting the importance of condensate-mediated organization in regulating cellular biochemistry and the important role disordered regions play in determining condensate composition and function.

(F) Boxplot (min-max) of mCherry constructs expressed in (E) (left) and S5ph signal enrichment (right) within CFP-LacI-FUSIDR foci for experiments in (E). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 5. (G) Schematic of predicted functional consequence of retargeted phosphorylation by CDK11 chimera. (H) Representative images of RNA FISH using a probe specific to the 2-6-3 Lac reporter to detect transcriptional activity (top row) for Lac array cells expressing mCherry- no IDR, CDK11, CDK11 chimera, or kinase-dead (KD) chimera (middle row) within CFP-LacI-FUSIDR foci (bottom row). Whole-cell scale bars, 5 mm. Inset scale bars, 1 mm. (I) Boxplot (min-max) of RNA-FISH probe signal for experiments in (H). p values represent one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control, n = 5.

3508 Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024

[Page 14]

DISCUSSION Through a comparative analysis of proteins selectively partitioned into two different condensates, we find that IDRs with specific sequence features can act as targeting signals. These condensate-targeting IDRs are necessary and sufficient for the partitioning of proteins and are selective for targeting specific condensates. Swapping sequence features or IDRs directs partitioning into different condensates, demonstrating that the sequence features in an IDR are drivers of this specificity and that IDRs are sufficient to redirect the targeting of proteins. Organizing cellular content is crucial for the regulation of biochemistry, and we find that retargeting an enzyme to a different condensate also has a consequence for enzymatic activity and downstream function. Although similar signal sequences exist for compositional control of membrane-bound organelles, we propose that instead of direct chaperone or receptor interactions, condensate-targeting signal sequences rely on their ability to interact with the distinct chemical environment of different condensates. Supporting this notion, we find that the differentially partitioned IDRs are enriched for specific classes of amino acids complementary to the amino acids enriched on the condensate-promoting IDR, and swapping these features changes the specificity of an IDR’s targeting. It is possible that these IDRs adopt context-dependent structures that promote targeting, but results in this study show that regions without any predicted stable structure are sufficient for targeting and compositional control of condensates. Although IDRs are defined by their lack of structure-promoting amino acids, they contain a large range of chemical diversity.9,10,63–66 IDRs have many known functions.9,10,63 Here, we focus on their ability to engage in dynamic multivalent interactions underlying the formation of biomolecular condensates.64,66 Given the large diversity of amino acid compositions, we and others have speculated that different IDRs could establish distinct chemical environments leading to the compositional specificity of a condensate.67–70 We have recently demonstrated that condensates composed of the C-terminal disordered region of MED1 selectively partition functionally related partners by using complementary interactions on the partners’ IDRs.16 Here, we extend these observations using a combination of cell-free and cell-based methods, quantitative proteomics, and a comparative analysis of FUSIDR and MEDIDR condensates. These data reveal that two IDR-driven condensates can create distinct local environments that partition functionally distinct groups of proteins. The IDRs that drive partitioning into each condensate have strikingly different sequence features, with those partitioning into FUSIDR enriched for amino acids capable of interacting with tyrosines and glutamines (positive charge, proline, and glutamine)49,71 and those partitioning into MED1IDR enriched for amino acids capable of interacting with blocks of charged residues (basic and acidic blocks).16 Although these results provide a proof of principle for IDR-mediated compositional control for two condensates, the cell has dozens of condensates, each with its unique composition. These different condensates likely have their own distinct sequence feature rules or ‘‘grammars’’ encoded into selectively partitioned

IDRs. Whether each condensate has a specific ‘‘zip code’’ or ‘‘grammar’’ remains an exciting topic for future studies. Limitations of the study The goal of our study was to perform a comparative analysis of proteins differentially partitioned by two IDR-mediated condensates. We focus explicitly on the IDRs of MED1 and FUS to identify condensate-dependent IDR-mediated interactions. This approach removes the IDRs from the context of the rest of their protein and other complex subunit interactions. The other portions of either MED1 or FUS likely contribute to the partitioning of other proteins into their respective condensates, and we will have missed those proteins. Our stringent approach to only investigate proteins found in both assays and in all replicates may have overlooked highly functional interactions. This approach likely identified only a small subset of the true composition of condensates composed of these IDRs. Our goal here is to understand how differential partitioning is achieved rather than generating comprehensive maps of composition. Finally, condensate composition will likely be highly dynamic and responsive to cellular contexts, which we may have missed in our particular experimental setup. For example, FUS is known to play a role in DNA damage response and MED1 in gene regulation in specific cell types. It is possible that under these specific contexts, additional interactors would emerge. RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Benjamin Sabari (Benjamin.Sabari@UTSouthwestern.edu). Materials availability Reagents generated in this study are available upon request. Data and code availability d Proteomics data have been deposited at MassIVE under accession number MSV000093520. Raw imaging data have been deposited at Mendeley under the https://doi.org/10.17632/y5pxz47yr6.1. All other data will be shared by the lead author upon request. d This paper does not report original code d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the UTSW Proteomics Core facility for assistance with mass spectrometry experiments; Heankel Lyons, Christy Fornero, and Michael Rosen for their critical review of the manuscript; and Heankel Lyons for the design of RNA-FISH probes. This work was supported by a sponsored research agreement with Pfizer Centers for Therapeutic Innovation to B.R.S., Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) grant RR190090 to B.R.S., National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant GM147583 to B.R.S., and The Welch Foundation Catalyst grant V-I-0004-20230731 to B.R.S. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization, N.D.L.C., P.P., R.T.V., and B.R.S.; methodology, N.D.L.C., P.P., R.T.V., B.A.C., M.O., and B.R.S.; software, R.T.V.; formal analysis, N.D.L.C., P.P., and R.T.V.; investigation, N.D.L.C., P.P., and R.T.V.; writing – original draft, N.D.L.C. and B.R.S.; writing – review and editing, N.D.L.C.,

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024 3509

[Page 15]

P.P., R.T.V., B.A.C., M.O., and B.R.S.; visualization, N.D.L.C., P.P., R.T.V., and B.R.S.; supervision, B.R.S.; funding acquisition, B.R.S. DECLARATION OF INTERESTS B.R.S. is an advisory board member of Molecular Cell. B.A.C. and M.O. were employed by Pfizer Inc. at the time of writing. STAR+METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: KEY RESOURCES TABLE EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS B Cell culture B Generation of stable cell lines B Single-cell dilutions d METHOD DETAILS B APEX reaction B SILAC cell culture B Nuclear extract preparation for proteomic samples B SILAC lysate preparation B Biotinylated protein pull-down B Proteomics for SILAC samples B U2OS nuclear extract preparation B Pelleting assay B Tandem mass tag proteomics B Western blot B Immunofluorescence B RNA FISH B Microscopy B Processing coverslips of co-transfected cells B Microscopy analysis B FUS and MED1 IDR parametric analysis B Proteomic data analysis B Analysis of protein and IDR features from proteomics data d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j. molcel.2024.08.017.

domains. 10.033.

Cell

155,

1049–1060.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.

5. Chong, S., Dugast-Darzacq, C., Liu, Z., Dong, P., Dailey, G.M., Cattoglio, C., Heckert, A., Banala, S., Lavis, L., Darzacq, X., et al. (2018). Imaging dynamic and selective low-complexity domain interactions that control gene transcription. Science 361, eaar2555. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. aar2555. 6. Shin, Y., and Brangwynne, C.P. (2017). Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease. Science 357, eaaf4382. https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.aaf4382. 7. Mittag, T., and Pappu, R.V. (2022). A conceptual framework for understanding phase separation and addressing open questions and challenges. Mol. Cell 82, 2201–2214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2022. 05.018. 8. Choi, J.-M., Holehouse, A.S., and Pappu, R.V. (2020). Physical principles underlying the complex biology of intracellular phase transitions. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 49, 107–133. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biophys121219-081629. 9. Wright, P.E., and Dyson, H.J. (2015). Intrinsically disordered proteins in cellular signalling and regulation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 18–29. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3920. 10. Holehouse, A.S., and Kragelund, B.B. (2023). The molecular basis for cellular function of intrinsically disordered protein regions. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 25, 187–211. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580-023-00673-0. 11. Teilum, K., Olsen, J.G., and Kragelund, B.B. (2021). On the specificity of protein–protein interactions in the context of disorder. Biochem. J. 478, 2035–2050. https://doi.org/10.1042/bcj20200828. 12. Currie, S.L., Xing, W., Muhlrad, D., Decker, C.J., Parker, R., and Rosen, M.K. (2023). Quantitative reconstitution of yeast RNA processing bodies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 120, e2214064120. https://doi.org/10.1073/ pnas.2214064120. 13. Sanders, D.W., Kedersha, N., Lee, D.S.W., Strom, A.R., Drake, V., Riback, J.A., Bracha, D., Eeftens, J.M., Iwanicki, A., Wang, A., et al. (2020). Competing protein-RNA interaction networks control multiphase intracellular organization. Cell 181, 306–324.e28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 2020.03.050. 14. Guillén-Boixet, J., Kopach, A., Holehouse, A.S., Wittmann, S., Jahnel, M., €ßler, R., Kim, K., Trussina, I.R.E.A., Wang, J., Mateju, D., et al. (2020). Schlu RNA-induced conformational switching and clustering of G3BP drive stress granule assembly by condensation. Cell 181, 346–361.e17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.049.

Received: December 15, 2023 Revised: May 3, 2024 Accepted: August 10, 2024 Published: September 3, 2024

15. Yang, P., Mathieu, C., Kolaitis, R.-M., Zhang, P., Messing, J., Yurtsever, U., Yang, Z., Wu, J., Li, Y., Pan, Q., et al. (2020). G3BP1 is a tunable switch that triggers phase separation to assemble stress granules. Cell 181, 325– 345.e28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.046.

REFERENCES

16. Lyons, H., Veettil, R.T., Pradhan, P., Fornero, C., De La Cruz, N., Ito, K., Eppert, M., Roeder, R.G., and Sabari, B.R. (2023). Functional partitioning of transcriptional regulators by patterned charge blocks. Cell 186, 327– 345.e28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.12.013.

1. Banani, S.F., Lee, H.O., Hyman, A.A., and Rosen, M.K. (2017). Biomolecular condensates: organizers of cellular biochemistry. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 285–298. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm.2017.7. 2. Banani, S.F., Rice, A.M., Peeples, W.B., Lin, Y., Jain, S., Parker, R., and Rosen, M.K. (2016). Compositional control of phase-separated cellular bodies. Cell 166, 651–663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.06.010. 3. Kato, M., Han, T.W., Xie, S., Shi, K., Du, X., Wu, L.C., Mirzaei, H., Goldsmith, E.J., Longgood, J., Pei, J., et al. (2012). Cell-free formation of RNA granules: low complexity sequence domains form dynamic fibers within hydrogels. Cell 149, 753–767. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012. 04.017. 4. Kwon, I., Kato, M., Xiang, S., Wu, L., Theodoropoulos, P., Mirzaei, H., Han, T., Xie, S., Corden, J.L., and McKnight, S.L. (2013). Phosphorylation-regulated binding of RNA polymerase II to fibrous polymers of low-complexity

3510 Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024

17. Holehouse, A.S., Das, R.K., Ahad, J.N., Richardson, M.O.G., and Pappu, R.V. (2017). CIDER: resources to analyze sequence-ensemble relationships of intrinsically disordered proteins. Biophys. J. 112, 16–21. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2016.11.3200. 18. Xue, B., Dunker, A.K., and Uversky, V.N. (2012). Orderly order in protein intrinsic disorder distribution: disorder in 3500 proteomes from viruses and the three domains of life. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 30, 137–149. https://doi.org/10.1080/07391102.2012.675145. 19. Wang, J., Choi, J.-M., Holehouse, A.S., Lee, H.O., Zhang, X., Jahnel, M., Maharana, S., Lemaitre, R., Pozniakovsky, A., Drechsel, D., et al. (2018). A molecular grammar governing the driving forces for phase separation of prion-like RNA binding proteins. Cell 174, 688–699.e16. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.006.

[Page 16]

20. Martin, E.W., Holehouse, A.S., Peran, I., Farag, M., Incicco, J.J., Bremer, A., Grace, C.R., Soranno, A., Pappu, R.V., and Mittag, T. (2020). Valence and patterning of aromatic residues determine the phase behavior of prion-like domains. Science 367, 694–699. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw8653. 21. Welles, R.M., Sojitra, K.A., Garabedian, M.V., Xia, B., Wang, W., Guan, M., Regy, R.M., Gallagher, E.R., Hammer, D.A., Mittal, J., et al. (2024). Determinants that enable disordered protein assembly into discrete condensed phases. Nat. Chem. 16, 1062–1072. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41557-023-01423-7. 22. Rana, U., Xu, K., Narayanan, A., Walls, M.T., Panagiotopoulos, A.Z., Avalos, J.L., and Brangwynne, C.P. (2024). Asymmetric oligomerization state and sequence patterning can tune multiphase condensate miscibility. Nat. Chem. 16, 1073–1082. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-02401456-6. 23. Patel, A., Lee, H.O., Jawerth, L., Maharana, S., Jahnel, M., Hein, M.Y., Stoynov, S., Mahamid, J., Saha, S., Franzmann, T.M., et al. (2015). A liquid-to-solid phase transition of the ALS protein FUS accelerated by disease mutation. Cell 162, 1066–1077. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015. 07.047. 24. Sabari, B.R., Dall’Agnese, A., Boija, A., Klein, I.A., Coffey, E.L., Shrinivas, K., Abraham, B.J., Hannett, N.M., Zamudio, A.V., Manteiga, J.C., et al. (2018). Coactivator condensation at super-enhancers links phase separation and gene control. Science 361, eaar3958. https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.aar3958. 25. Shin, Y., Berry, J., Pannucci, N., Haataja, M.P., Toettcher, J.E., and Brangwynne, C.P. (2017). Spatiotemporal control of intracellular phase transitions using light-activated optoDroplets. Cell 168, 159–171.e14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.11.054. 26. Bracha, D., Walls, M.T., Wei, M.-T., Zhu, L., Kurian, M., Avalos, J.L., Toettcher, J.E., and Brangwynne, C.P. (2018). Mapping local and global liquid phase behavior in living cells using photo-Oligomerizable seeds. Cell 175, 1467–1480.e13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.048. 27. Murray, D.T., Kato, M., Lin, Y., Thurber, K.R., Hung, I., McKnight, S.L., and Tycko, R. (2017). Structure of FUS protein fibrils and its relevance to selfassembly and phase separation of low-complexity domains. Cell 171, 615–627.e16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.08.048. 28. Chen, L., Zhang, Z., Han, Q., Maity, B.K., Rodrigues, L., Zboril, E., Adhikari, R., Ko, S.-H., Li, X., Yoshida, S.R., et al. (2023). Hormoneinduced enhancer assembly requires an optimal level of hormone receptor multivalent interactions. Mol. Cell 83, 3438–3456.e12. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.molcel.2023.08.027. 29. Patil, A., Strom, A.R., Paulo, J.A., Collings, C.K., Ruff, K.M., Shinn, M.K., Sankar, A., Cervantes, K.S., Wauer, T., St Laurent, J.D.S., et al. (2023). A disordered region controls cBAF activity via condensation and partner recruitment. Cell 186, 4936–4955.e26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 2023.08.032. 30. Gan, P., Eppert, M., De La Cruz, N.D.L., Lyons, H., Shah, A.M., Veettil, R.T., Chen, K., Pradhan, P., Bezprozvannaya, S., Xu, L., et al. (2024). Coactivator condensation drives cardiovascular cell lineage specification. Sci. Adv. 10, eadk7160. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adk7160. 31. Ahn, J.H., Davis, E.S., Daugird, T.A., Zhao, S., Quiroga, I.Y., Uryu, H., Li, J., Storey, A.J., Tsai, Y.-H., Keeley, D.P., et al. (2021). Phase separation drives aberrant chromatin looping and cancer development. Nature 595, 591–595. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03662-5. 32. Jachowicz, J.W., Strehle, M., Banerjee, A.K., Blanco, M.R., Thai, J., and Guttman, M. (2022). Xist spatially amplifies SHARP/SPEN recruitment to balance chromosome-wide silencing and specificity to the X chromosome. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 29, 239–249. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41594-022-00739-1. 33. Kuang, J., Zhai, Z., Li, P., Shi, R., Guo, W., Yao, Y., Guo, J., Zhao, G., He, J., Xu, S., et al. (2021). SS18 regulates pluripotent-somatic transition through phase separation. Nat. Commun. 12, 4090. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41467-021-24373-5.

34. Wang, J., Yu, H., Ma, Q., Zeng, P., Wu, D., Hou, Y., Liu, X., Jia, L., Sun, J., Chen, Y., et al. (2021). Phase separation of OCT4 controls TAD reorganization to promote cell fate transitions. Cell Stem Cell 28, 1868– 1883.e11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2021.04.023. 35. Lin, Y., Currie, S.L., and Rosen, M.K. (2017). Intrinsically disordered sequences enable modulation of protein phase separation through distributed tyrosine motifs. J. Biol. Chem. 292, 19110–19120. https://doi.org/ 10.1074/jbc.m117.800466. 36. Wei, M.-T., Chang, Y.-C., Shimobayashi, S.F., Shin, Y., Strom, A.R., and Brangwynne, C.P. (2020). Nucleated transcriptional condensates amplify gene expression. Nat. Cell Biol. 324, 1729. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41556-020-00578-6. 37. Kim, Y.J., Lee, M., Lee, Y.-T., Jing, J., Sanders, J.T., Botten, G.A., He, L., Lyu, J., Zhang, Y., Mettlen, M., et al. (2023). Light-activated macromolecular phase separation modulates transcription by reconfiguring chromatin interactions. Sci. Adv. 9, eadg1123. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv. adg1123. 38. Necci, M., Piovesan, D., Clementel, D., Dosztányi, Z., and Tosatto, S.C.E. (2021). MobiDB-lite 3.0: fast consensus annotation of intrinsic disorder flavors in proteins. Bioinformatics 36, 5533–5534. https://doi.org/10.1093/ bioinformatics/btaa1045. 39. Janicki, S.M., Tsukamoto, T., Salghetti, S.E., Tansey, W.P., Sachidanandam, R., Prasanth, K.V., Ried, T., Shav-Tal, Y., Bertrand, E., Singer, R.H., et al. (2004). From silencing to gene expression: real-time analysis in single cells. Cell 116, 683–698. https://doi.org/10.1016/ s0092-8674(04)00171-0. 40. Boija, A., Klein, I.A., Sabari, B.R., Dall’Agnese, A., Coffey, E.L., Zamudio, A.V., Li, C.H., Shrinivas, K., Manteiga, J.C., Hannett, N.M., et al. (2018). Transcription factors activate genes through the phase-separation capacity of their activation domains. Cell 175, 1842–1855.e16. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.042. 41. Zamudio, A.V., Dall’Agnese, A., Henninger, J.E., Manteiga, J.C., Afeyan, L.K., Hannett, N.M., Coffey, E.L., Li, C.H., Oksuz, O., Sabari, B.R., et al. (2019). Mediator condensates localize signaling factors to key cell identity genes. Mol. Cell 76, 753–766.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019. 08.016. 42. Hung, V., Udeshi, N.D., Lam, S.S., Loh, K.H., Cox, K.J., Pedram, K., Carr, S.A., and Ting, A.Y. (2016). Spatially resolved proteomic mapping in living cells with the engineered peroxidase APEX2. Nat. Protoc. 11, 456–475. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2016.018. 43. Lam, S.S., Martell, J.D., Kamer, K.J., Deerinck, T.J., Ellisman, M.H., Mootha, V.K., and Ting, A.Y. (2015). Directed evolution of APEX2 for electron microscopy and proximity labeling. Nat. Methods 12, 51–54. https:// doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3179. 44. Basu, S., Mackowiak, S.D., Niskanen, H., Knezevic, D., Asimi, V., Grosswendt, S., Geertsema, H., Ali, S., Jerkovi c, I., Ewers, H., et al. (2020). Unblending of transcriptional condensates in human repeat expansion disease. Cell 181, 1062–1079.e30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 2020.04.018. 45. Hoell, J.I., Larsson, E., Runge, S., Nusbaum, J.D., Duggimpudi, S., Farazi, T.A., Hafner, M., Borkhardt, A., Sander, C., and Tuschl, T. (2011). RNA targets of wild-type and mutant FET family proteins. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 18, 1428–1431. https://doi.org/10.1038/nsmb.2163. 46. Xiao, R., Chen, J.-Y., Liang, Z., Luo, D., Chen, G., Lu, Z.J., Chen, Y., Zhou, B., Li, H., Du, X., et al. (2019). Pervasive chromatin-RNA binding protein interactions enable RNA-based regulation of transcription. Cell 178, 107– 121.e18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.06.001. 47. Finn, R.D., Coggill, P., Eberhardt, R.Y., Eddy, S.R., Mistry, J., Mitchell, A.L., Potter, S.C., Punta, M., Qureshi, M., Sangrador-Vegas, A., et al. (2016). The Pfam protein families database: towards a more sustainable future. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D279–D285. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/ gkv1344. 48. Emenecker, R.J., Griffith, D., and Holehouse, A.S. (2021). Metapredict: a fast, accurate, and easy-to-use predictor of consensus disorder and

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024 3511

[Page 17]

structure. Biophys. J. 120, 4312–4319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2021. 08.039. 49. Vernon, R.M., Chong, P.A., Tsang, B., Kim, T.H., Bah, A., Farber, P., Lin, H., and Forman-Kay, J.D. (2018). Pi-Pi contacts are an overlooked protein feature relevant to phase separation. eLife 7, e31486. https://doi.org/10. 7554/elife.31486. 50. Rhys, N.H., Soper, A.K., and Dougan, L. (2012). The hydrogen-bonding ability of the amino acid glutamine revealed by neutron diffraction experiments. J. Phys. Chem. B 116, 13308–13319. https://doi.org/10.1021/ jp307442f. 51. Murthy, A.C., Dignon, G.L., Kan, Y., Zerze, G.H., Parekh, S.H., Mittal, J., and Fawzi, N.L. (2019). Molecular interactions underlying liquidliquid phase separation of the FUS low-complexity domain. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 637–648. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-019-0250-x. 52. Flores-Solis, D., Lushpinskaia, I.P., Polyansky, A.A., Changiarath, A., Boehning, M., Mirkovic, M., Walshe, J., Pietrek, L.M., Cramer, P., Stelzl, L.S., et al. (2023). Driving forces behind phase separation of the carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. Nat. Commun. 14, 5979. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-41633-8. 53. Burley, S.K., and Petsko, G.A. (1986). Amino-aromatic interactions in proteins. FEBS Lett. 203, 139–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-5793(86) 80730-x. 54. Scrutton, N.S., and Raine, A.R.C. (1996). Cation-p bonding and amino-aromatic interactions in the biomolecular recognition of substituted ammonium ligands. Biochem. J. 319, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1042/bj3190001. 55. Singh, J., and Thornton, J.M. (1990). SIRIUS an automated method for the analysis of the preferred packing arrangements between protein groups. J. Mol. Biol. 211, 595–615. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(90) 90268-q. 56. Zondlo, N.J. (2013). Aromatic–proline interactions: electronically tunable CH/p interactions. Acc. Chem. Res. 46, 1039–1049. https://doi.org/10. 1021/ar300087y. €hnel, J., and Hilgenfeld, R. (2001). C57. Brandl, M., Weiss, M.S., Jabs, A., Su h/p-interactions in proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 307, 357–377. https://doi.org/ 10.1006/jmbi.2000.4473. 58. Hluchý, M., Gajdusková, P., Ruiz de Los Mozos, I.R.d.l., Rájecký, M., Kluge, M., Berger, B.-T., Slabá, Z., Pot esil, D., Weiß, E., Ule, J., et al. (2022). CDK11 regulates pre-mRNA splicing by phosphorylation of SF3B1. Nature 609, 829–834. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-02205204-z. 59. Gajdu sková, P., Ruiz de Los Mozos, I.R.d.l., Rájecký, M., Hluchý, M., Ule, J., and Blazek, D. (2020). CDK11 is required for transcription of replicationdependent histone genes. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 27, 500–510. https://doi. org/10.1038/s41594-020-0406-8.

3512 Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512, September 19, 2024

60. Pak, V., Eifler, T.T., J€ ager, S., Krogan, N.J., Fujinaga, K., and Peterlin, B.M. (2015). CDK11 in TREX/THOC regulates HIV mRNA 3’ end processing. Cell Host Microbe 18, 560–570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2015.10.012. 61. Burke, K.A., Janke, A.M., Rhine, C.L., and Fawzi, N.L. (2015). Residue-byresidue view of in vitro FUS granules that bind the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II. Mol. Cell 60, 231–241. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.09.006. 62. Guo, Y.E., Manteiga, J.C., Henninger, J.E., Sabari, B.R., Dall’Agnese, A., Hannett, N.M., Spille, J.-H., Afeyan, L.K., Zamudio, A.V., Shrinivas, K., et al. (2019). Pol II phosphorylation regulates a switch between transcriptional and splicing condensates. Nature 572, 543–548. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41586-019-1464-0. 63. van der Lee, R.v.d., Buljan, M., Lang, B., Weatheritt, R.J., Daughdrill, G.W., Dunker, A.K., Fuxreiter, M., Gough, J., Gsponer, J., Jones, D.T., et al. (2014). Classification of intrinsically disordered regions and proteins. Chem. Rev. 114, 6589–6631. https://doi.org/10.1021/cr400525m. 64. Pappu, R.V., Cohen, S.R., Dar, F., Farag, M., and Kar, M. (2023). Phase transitions of associative biomacromolecules. Chem. Rev. 123, 8945– 8987. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00814. 65. Das, R.K., Ruff, K.M., and Pappu, R.V. (2015). Relating sequence encoded information to form and function of intrinsically disordered proteins. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 32, 102–112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2015.03.008. 66. Martin, E.W., and Holehouse, A.S. (2020). Intrinsically disordered protein regions and phase separation: sequence determinants of assembly or lack thereof. Emerging Top. Life Sci. 18, 285. https://doi.org/10.1042/ etls20190164. 67. Sabari, B.R. (2020). Biomolecular condensates and gene activation in development and disease. Dev. Cell 55, 84–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. devcel.2020.09.005. 68. Sabari, B.R., Dall’Agnese, A., and Young, R.A. (2020). Biomolecular condensates in the nucleus. Trends Biochem. Sci. 45, 961–977. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.tibs.2020.06.007. 69. Ditlev, J.A., Case, L.B., and Rosen, M.K. (2018). Who’s in and who’s out— compositional control of biomolecular condensates. J. Mol. Biol. 430, 4666–4684. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2018.08.003. 70. Boeynaems, S., Chong, S., Gsponer, J., Holt, L., Milovanovic, D., Mitrea, D.M., Mueller-Cajar, O., Portz, B., Reilly, J.F., Reinkemeier, C.D., et al. (2023). Phase separation in biology and disease; current perspectives and open questions. J. Mol. Biol. 435, 167971. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jmb.2023.167971. 71. Gromiha, M.M., and Selvaraj, S. (2004). Inter-residue interactions in protein folding and stability. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 86, 235–277. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2003.09.003.

[Page 18]

STAR+METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE

REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

Antibodies V5 Tag

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #R960-25 Lot#: 2212258;RRID: AB_2556564

b-Tubulin

Abcam

Cat. #6046 Lot#: GR3294994-1; RRID: AB_2210370

Neutravidin Rhodamine Red-X

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #A6378 Lot #: 2128983, 2198599

MED1

Bethyl

Cat. #A303-876A Lot#:1;RRID: AB_2620226

FUS/TLS (E3O8I)

Cell Signaling

Cat. #67840; RRID: AB_2941069

Streptavidin, horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugate

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #S-911 Lot#: 2145534

CTR9

Millipore Sigma

Cat. #HPA068122 Lot #: R97681; RRID: AB_2685959

p300

Active Motif

Cat. #61401 Lot#: 31519003; RRID: AB_2716754

EWSR1 (5H7)

Invitrogen

Cat. #MA5-24791 Lot#: ZC4238449A; RRID: AB_2717264

CDK11B

Invitrogen

Cat. #PA5-88789 Lot#: YD3881441A; RRID: AB_2805133

RNAP II CTD

Millipore Sigma

Cat. #05-952 Lot#: 3305861; RRID: AB_11213782

RNAP II Subunit B1 (Phosph CTD Ser-5) Clone 3E8

Sigma

Cat. #04-1572 Lot#: 3709580; RRID: AB_10615822

Anti-goat IgG-Alexa Fluor 488

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #A-11055 Lot#:2211210; RRID: AB_2534102

Anti-mouse IgG-Alexa Fluor 488

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #A11001 Lot#:2189178; RRID: AB_2534069

Anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 488

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #A11008 Lot#: 2179202; RRID: AB_143165

Anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 555

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #A32732 Lot#: VC297826; RRID: AB_2633281

Anti-mouse IgG-Alexa Fluor 555

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #A32727 Lot#: VC295499; RRID: AB_2633276

Anti-rat IgG-Alexa Fluor 647

Thermo Fisher

Cat. #A48272 Lot#: XK357690; RRID: AB_2893138

Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-Mouse IgG

Cytiva

NA931V; RRID: AB_772210

Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-Rabbit IgG

Cytiva

NA934V; RRID: AB_772206

Stable Competent E. coli

NEB

C3040H

5-alpha Competent E. coli

NEB

C2987H

NiCo21(DE3) Competent E. coli

NEB

C2529H

DPBS

Thermo Fisher

10010049

DMEM

Fisher Scientific

11995

FBS

Sigma

F0926

GlutaMAX

Fisher Scientific

35050

Doxycycline hyclate

Sigma Aldrich

D9891

Puromycin

Fisher Scientific

A11138

Penicillin-Streptomycin

Fisher Scientific

15140

L-Arginine-HCL, 13C6 for SILAC

Thermo Fisher

88210

L-Lysine-2HCl, 13C6 for SILAC

Thermo Fisher

89988

DMEM for SILAC

Thermo Fisher

88364

Bacterial and virus strains

Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins

Lipofectamine 3000 Transfection Reagent

Thermo Fisher

L3000015

Gibco Opti-MEM I Reduced Serum Medium

Thermo Fisher

31-985-062

D-(+)-Biotin-tyramine amide

Biosearch Technologies

CAS No.:41994-02-9

Biotin

Sigma

B4501

Pierce Streptavidin Magnetic Beads

Thermo Fisher

hydrogen peroxide 30% w/w

Sigma Aldrich

H1009 (Continued on next page)

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

e1

[Page 19]

Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

(+)-Sodium L-ascorbate

Sigma Aldrich

A7631

Sodium azide

Sigma Aldrich

S2002

Trolox

Sigma Aldrich

238813

HEPES

Thermo Fisher

BP310

Potassium Chloride

Fisher

BP366

Magnesium Chloride, Hexahydrate

Sigma

442611

EDTA

VWR

101173-976

IGEPAL CA-630

Sigma Aldrich

I8896

DTT

Sigma Aldrich

D0632

cOmplete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail

Sigma Aldrich

11873580001

Qubit Protein Assay Kit

Thermo Fisher

Q33211

Tween 20

Fisher

BP337

Sodium Deoxycholate

Fisher

AAJ6228822

Triton X-100

Sigma Aldrich

T9284

Urea

Sigma Aldrich

U5378

Sodium Bicarbonate

Fisher Scientific

S233-500

Glycerol

Fisher Scientific

G33-4

Bromophenol blue

Sigma Aldrich

B0126

2-Mercaptoethanol

Sigma Aldrich

M3148

PMSF

Sigma Aldrich

52332

Slide-A-Lyzer MINI Dialysis Device

Thermo Fisher

69580

3 to 8% Tris-Acetate 1.0 mm polyacrylamide gel

Thermo Fisher

EA03752BOX

Tris-Acetate SDS Running Buffer

FisherScientific

LA0041

Invitrogen Mini Gel Tank and Blot Module set

Thermo Fisher

NW2000

0.45-um PVDF membrane

Millipore

IPVH00010

Novex Tris-Glycine Transfer Buffer

FisherScientific

LC3675

SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Substrate

Thermo Fisher

34577

Methanol

Thermo Fisher

A412-4

Micro cover glasses, rectangular 50324 mm #1.5

VWR

48366-067

Paraformaldehyde

VWR

BT140770

IgG-free bovine serum albumin, BSA

VWR

102643-516

Hoechst 33342

Thermo Fisher

62249

slides

VWR

10144-820

Vectashield

VWR

101098-042

nail polish

VWR

100491-940

NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix

NEB

E2621L

Phusion Flash High Fidelity PCR Master Mix

Thermo Fisher

F548L

PureLink Quick Plasmid Miniprep kit

Thermo Fisher

K210011

PureLink Quick Plasmid Midiprep kit

Thermo Fisher

K210005

Stellaris RNA FISH Hybridization Buffer

LGC Biosearch Technologies

SMF-HB1-10

Stellaris RNA FISH Wash Buffer A

LGC Biosearch Technologies

SMF-WA1-60

Stellaris RNA FISH Wash Buffer B

LGC Biosearch Technologies

SMF-WB1-20

Deposited data Proteomics data

MassIVE

MSV000093520

Raw imaging data

Mendeley

https://doi.org/10.17632/y5pxz47yr6.1 (Continued on next page)

e2

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

[Page 20]

Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

U2OS 2-6-3

Janicki et al.39

N/A

U2OS 2-6-3 stable dox inducible mEGFP-LacI-APEX2 (control)

This paper

N/A

U2OS 2-6-3 stable dox inducible mEGFP-LacI-APEX2MED1IDR

This paper

N/A

U2OS 2-6-3 stable dox inducible mEGFP-LacI-APEX2FUSIDR

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mEGFP_MEDIDR

Sabari et al.24

N/A

IDR

Lyons et al.16

N/A

Experimental models: Cell lines

Recombinant DNA

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_FUS

PB_TRE_Puro_SV40_GFP-LAC-APEX2

This paper

N/A

PB_TRE_Puro_SV40_GFP-LAC-APEX2-MED1IDR

This paper

N/A

PB_TRE_Puro_SV40_GFP-LAC-APEX2-FUSNIDR

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI

Lyons et al.16

N/A

Lyons et al.16

N/A

Lyons et al.16

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry

Lyons et al.16

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_MED1IDR

Lyons et al.16

N/A

16

N/A

CFP-LacI-MED1IDR CFP-LacI-FUS

IDR

IDR

Lyons et al.

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-HTATSF1_deltaIDR

This paper

Template: Transomic BC009896

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-HTATSF1IDR

This paper

Template: Transomic BC009896

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-CDK11B_deltaIDR

This paper

Template: UTSW McDermott Sequencing core NM_033486.1

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-CDK11BIDR

This paper

Template: UTSW McDermott Sequencing core NM_033486.1

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry_SPT6_deltaIDR

pCDNA3.1_mCherry-FUS

Lyons et al.16

N/A

IDR

Lyons et al.16

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry_CTR9IDR

Lyons et al.16

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-EWSR1_deltaIDR

This paper

Template: UTSW McDermott Sequencing core NM_005243.3

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry_EWSR1IDR

Lyons et al.16

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-p300_deltaIDR

This paper

Gift from Laura Banaszynski, Ph.D.

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry_p300IDR

Lyons et al.16

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry_SPT6

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-KHDR1_deltaIDR

This paper

Template: Transomic BC000717

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-KHDR1IDR

This paper

Template: Transomic BC000717

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_miRFP670-CTR9IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_miRFP670-SPT6IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_miRFP670-CDK11BIDR

This paper

Template: UTSW McDermott Sequencing core NM_033486.1

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_miRFP670-KHDR1IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_miRFP670-p300IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-CDK11BIDR_EtoA

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-EWSR1IDR_PQtoA

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-SPT6IDR_KREDtoPQ

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-EWSR1IDR_PQaro-toBlocks

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-CDK11B_FL

This paper

Template: UTSW McDermott Sequencing core NM_033486.1 (Continued on next page)

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

e3

[Page 21]

Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE IDR

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-p300IDR-CDK11KDkinase

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_miRFP670-FUS_FL

This paper

Template: Addgene 26374

GraphPad Prism 9

GraphPad Software, LLC.

Version 9.3.1 https://www. graphpad.com/

ImageJ (FIJI)

Open Source

Version 2.3.0/1.53f https:// imagej.net/software/fiji/

metapredict

Emenecker et al.48

Version 2.3/ https://github. com/idptools/metapredict

Nikon Elements

Nikon instruments

https://www.microscope. healthcare.nikon.com/ products/software

MobiDB lite

Necci et al.38

Version 3.9.0/ http://old. protein.bio.unipd.it/mobidblite/

Local CIDER

Holehouse et al.17

Version 0.1.17/http://pappulab. github.io/localCIDER/

pCDNA3.1_NheI_XbaI_mCherry-p300

-CDK11

kinase

Software and algorithms

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS Cell culture All cells were grown in full DMEM (Fisher Scientific 11995073) supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher 15140122) and GlutaMAX (Fisher Scientific 35050061) at 37 C with 5% CO2 in a humidified sterile incubator. Generation of stable cell lines U2OS 2-6-3 cells were co-transfected as stated above with a piggyBac transposase expression vector and plasmid expression cassette for a doxycycline inducible fusion protein GFP-LacI-APEX2-(IDR) and puromycin resistance selection marker. Cells were incubated in Lipofectamine 3000 Transfection Reagent (ThermoFisher L3000015) for 48 hrs and allowed to recover for 24 hrs post transfection. Cells were selected by incubating in full DMEM supplemented 1.5 ug/mL of puromycin for 5-7 days. Selection media was changed every other day. Single-cell dilutions U2OS 2-6-3 cell populations transfected with dox inducible constructs were trypsinyzed, pelleted, and resuspended in full DMEM to a concentration of 4e105 cells/mL. 10mL of the cell solution was diluted into 1mL of compete medium. 12.5mL of diluted cell solution was added to 10mL of conditioned medium. 96-well cell culture plates were seeded with 100 mL of final cell dilution. Seeded plates were incubated at 37 C with 5% CO2 for 7-14 days. Wells with colonies were expanded to 24-well plates and screened for homogenous expressing isolated populations upon dox induction. METHOD DETAILS APEX reaction U2OS 2-6-3 cells were grown to 80% confluency and incubated with 500 mM of biotin-phenol (Biosearch Technologies, CAS No. 41994-02-9) and 1ug/mL of doxycycline (Sigma Aldrich D9891-1G) in full DMEM for 24 hrs. Cells were treated for 1 min with 1mM H2O2 (Sigma Aldrich H1009) to initiate biotinylating reaction and washed three times with Quencher solution (10 mM sodium ascorbate (Sigma Aldrich A7631), 5 mM Trolox (Sigma Aldrich 238813), 10 mM sodium azide (Sigma Aldrich S2002) in DPBS). Cells were washed once with PBS (Fisher Scientific 10010049), and collected by trypsinization, and pelleted at 500xg. SILAC cell culture U2OS 2-6-3 Lac array stable cell line expressing mEGFP-LacI-APEX2 (control) was seeded in a well of a 6-well plate at 30% confluency using DMEM for SILAC (Thermo Fisher, 88364) supplemented with 50 mg 13C6 L-Arginine-HCl (Thermo Scientific, 88210), 50 mg 13C6 L-Lysine-2HCl (Thermo Scientific, 88209), 10% dialyzed FBS, penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Scientific,15140122) and GlutaMAX (Fisher Scientific 35050061). The cells were expanded in SILAC media for five passages and heavy labeling incorporation of 99.5% was verified by proteomic analysis.

e4

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

[Page 22]

Nuclear extract preparation for proteomic samples 4-6 x 107 U2OS cell pellet was resuspended in 10 mL of CE buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.9, 10 mM KCL, 5 mM MgCl2, 1mM EDTA, 0.1% NP-40, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 10 mM sodium azide, 1 mM DTT, and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)) and incubate on ice for 5 minutes before pelleting at 500 rcf for 5 min at 4C. Nuclear pellet was resuspended in 1 mL of NE buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH7.9, 500 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM DTT, and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail) and placed on a rotator (VWR 10136-084) for 1.5 hrs at 4 C. Samples were centrifuged at maximum rcf at 4 C for 30-40 min and supernatant was collected. SILAC lysate preparation Protein concentration was measured using Quibit Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher, Q33211) and equal concentrations of heavy control lysate was added to experimental light lysate samples to prepare a test sample mix of 20mL to be analyzed by mass spectrometry for 1:1 ratio optimization. The mix test samples were adjusted as needed before final mix and subsequent pull-down. Biotinylated protein pull-down Pierce Streptavidin Magnetic Beads (Thermo Fisher 88816) were washed three times in 1 mL of TBST and once in 1 mL of NE buffer (20 mM HEPES-KOH pH7.9, 500 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM DTT, and cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail). DynaMag-2 (Invitrogen, 12321D) magnetic rack was used to collect beads, which were then resuspended in 110 mL of NE buffer. Pre-washed streptavidin beads were added to fixed 1:1 heavy: light lysate mix and incubated on a rotator overnight at 4C. Streptavidin beads were collected, and supernatant was removed. Beads were washed as described42 twice with RIPA lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) SDS, 0.5% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate and 1% (vol/vol) Triton X-100 in Millipore water, pH 7.5), once with 1M KCl, once with 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, twice with RIPA lysis buffer.Wash buffers were kept on ice throughout the procedure. Biotinylated proteins were eluted from the beads in 60 mL of 3X Laemmli buffer (6X: 0.35M Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 30% glycerol, 10% SDS, 20% beta-mercaptoethanol, 0.04% bromophenol blue) supplemented with 2 mM biotin for 10 min at 95 C. Sample were vortexed briefly, placed on ice for 3 min, and spun down briefly to bring down condensation. Proteomic samples were submitted the same day. Proteomics for SILAC samples Samples were digested overnight with trypsin (Pierce) following reduction and alkylation with DTT and iodoacetamide (Sigma–Aldrich). The samples then underwent solid-phase extraction cleanup with an Oasis HLB plate (Waters) and the resulting samples were injected onto either a Q Exactive HF or an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC-Nano liquid chromatography system. For Q Exactive HF samples, 2 uL of peptides were injected onto a 75 um i.d., 15-cm long EasySpray column (Thermo) and eluted with a gradient from 0%–28% buffer B over 90 min. Buffer A contained 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 80% (v/v) ACN, 10% (v/v) trifluoroethanol, and 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode with a source voltage of 2.5 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 300 C. MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and up to 20 MS/MS spectra were obtained in the ion trap for each full spectrum acquired using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for ions with charges 2-8. Dynamic exclusion was set for 20 s after an ion was selected for fragmentation. For Orbitrap Eclipse samples, 2 uL of peptides were injected onto a 75 um i.d., 75-cm long EasySpray column (Thermo) and eluted with a gradient from 0%–28% buffer B over 90 min. Buffer A contained 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 80% (v/v) ACN, 10% (v/v) trifluoroethanol, and 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode with a source voltage of 2.5 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 300 C. MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and MS/MS spectra were obtained in the ion trap for each full spectrum acquired using higherenergy collisional dissociation (HCD) for ions with charges 2-7 for 1 second. Dynamic exclusion was set for 30 s after an ion was selected for fragmentation. Raw MS data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v3.0 SP1 (Thermo), with peptide identification performed using a tryptic search with Sequest HT against the human reviewed protein database from UniProt. For Q Exactive samples, fragment and precursor tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da were specified, and for Orbitrap Eclipse samples, fragment and precursor tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da were specified. Three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, with oxidation of Met, 13C6-Lys, and 13C6-Arg set as variable modifications. Quantification was performed using a SILAC 2plex (Arg6, Lys6) quantification method within Proteome Discoverer. The false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was 1% for all peptides. U2OS nuclear extract preparation 1-2 x 108 U2OS cells were grown in DMEM (Fisher Scientific 11995073) supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher 15140122) and GlutaMAX (Fisher Scientific 35050061) at 37 C under 5% CO2. Cells were collected by trypsinization, pelleted at 500xg, and resuspended in 10 mL of buffer CE+NP40 (cytoplasmic extract) (20 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)). After 5 min incubation on ice, the sample was centrifuged at 500xg, 4 C. Pellet was washed three times in 4 mL of buffer CE (20 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl,

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

e5

[Page 23]

5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)) and resuspended in 1 mL of buffer NE (nuclear extract) (20 mM Tris-HCl, 420 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 25% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)). This sample was rotated at 4 C for 1 hour and clarified by centrifugation at 20,000xg. Clarified lysate was dialyzed in dialysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 75 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)) using Slide-A-Lyzer MINI Dialysis Device (Fisher Scientific 88404). Extracts were clarified and protein concentration was measured by Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Q33211). Pelleting assay Purified recombinant protein and U2OS nuclear extract were pre-clarified at 22,000 x g for at least 30 minutes to remove any insoluble material. Purified recombinant mEGFP-MED1IDR or mCherry-FUSIDR (final 40uM) and nuclear extract (final 0.6 mg/mL) were mixed in Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf 22431081) and incubated for 15 minutes at room temperature. The mixture was then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes in fixed angle rotor. The supernatant fraction was carefully removed leaving behind the pellet fraction. Both the pellet and supernatant fractions were brought to equal volume and resuspended in either 1x Laemmli sample buffer (58mM TrisHCl pH 6.8, 5% glycerol, 1.6% SDS, 3.3% beta-mercaptoethanol, 0.007% bromophenol blue) for SDS gel, western blot analysis or in a resuspension buffer for downstream proteomic analysis. Tandem mass tag proteomics Samples were dried down to approximately 25 uL in a SpeedVac, after which 25 uL of 10% SDS was added to each. 2 uL of (tris(2carboxyethyl) phosphine) (TCEP) was added to reduce disulfide bonds and samples were incubated at 37 oC for 30 min. After cooling, 2 uL of 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to alkylate the free cysteine thiols, and samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Following centrifugation for 2 min at 13.2 krpm, the supernatants were removed and digested overnight with trypsin at 37 oC using an S-Trap (Protifi). Following digestion, the peptide eluate was dried and reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB buffer. The samples were labelled with TMT-6plex reagents, quenched with 5% hydroxylamine, and combined. A reverse-phase fractionation spin column (Pierce) was used according to the manufacturer’s directions to fractionate the sample into 8 fractions. The fractions were dried in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in a 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA buffer. Fractions were injected onto an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC-Nano liquid chromatography system. Samples were injected onto a 75 um i.d., 75-cm long EasySpray column (Thermo) and eluted with a gradient from 0%–28% buffer B over 180 min. Buffer A contained 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 80% (v/v) ACN, 10% (v/v) trifluoroethanol, and 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode with a source voltage of 1.5-1.8 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 C. MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and top speed mode was used for SPS-MS3 analysis with a cycle time of 2.5 s. MS2 was performed with CID with a collision energy of 35%. The top 10 fragments were selected for MS3 fragmentation using HCD, with a collision energy of 55%. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 s after an ion was selected for fragmentation. Raw MS data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 SP1 (Thermo), with peptide identification performed using Sequest HT searching against the human reviewed protein database from UniProt along with the sequences of MED1 and FUS. Fragment and precursor tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da were specified, and three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys and TMT-6plex labelling of N-termini and Lys side chains were set as fixed modifications, with oxidation of Met set as a variable modification. The false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was 1% for all peptides. Western blot Samples were run on a 3% to 8% Tris-Acetate 1.0 mm polyacrylamide gel (Thermo Fisher EA03752BOX) using Tris-Acetate SDS Running Buffer (Fisher Scientific LA0041), in an Invitrogen Mini Gel Tank and Blot Module set (Thermo Fisher NW2000) at 150V for 75 min. Protein was wet transferred to a 0.45-um PVDF membrane (Millipore IPVH00010) in cold 10% Methanol Novex TrisGlycine Transfer Buffer (Fisher Scientific LC3675) at 200 mA for 105 min at room temperature. After transfer, the membrane was blocked with 5% non-fat milk in TBST for 1 h at room temperature (RT), then incubated in primary antibody in 5% non-fat milk in TBST overnight at 4 C. After three subsequent washes in TBST at room temperature, the membrane was incubated with 1:10,000 horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-Mouse IgG (Cytiva NA931V) or anti-Rabbit IgG (Cytiva NA934V) secondary antibody diluted in 5% non-fat-milk in TBST for 1h at RT. After washing with TBST, the membrane was developed with chemiluminescent HRP substrate (Thermo Fisher 34577) and imaged using Chemidoc MP system from Bio-Rad. Immunofluorescence Cells were grown on coverslips (VWR 48366-067) in a 6-well plate and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (VWR BT140770) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature (RT). After three washes in PBS for 10 min, samples were permeabilized with 0.5% triton X 100 (Sigma T9284) in PBS for 10 min at RT. After washing three times in PBS for 5 min, cells were blocked with 4% IgG-free bovine serum albumin, BSA, (VWR 102643-516) for 1 hour at RT and incubated overnight at RT with primary antibodies in 4% IgG-free BSA (samples were kept in the dark if they contained transfected fluorophores). Following three washes in PBS for 10 min each, samples were incubated with secondary antibodies for 2h in the dark. Next, cells were incubated with 1:5000 Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher 62249) in

e6

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

[Page 24]

Milli-Q water at RT in the dark (5 min). After washing once more with water, coverslips were mounted on slides (VWR 10144-820) with Vectashield (VWR 101098-042). Coverslips were sealed with nail polish (VWR 100491-940) and stored at 4 C. All primary antibodies for immunofluorescence were diluted 1:500. All secondary antibodies were diluted 1:10,000. RNA FISH RNA FISH probes targeting the b-globin intron 2 exon 3 module in U2OS 2-6-3 cells were designed using Stellaris Probe designer with the following parameters: human; masking level: 3, oligo length: 20, min. spacing length: 0, target sequence: 50 -GTGAGTTTGGGGACCCTTGATTGTTCTTTCTTTTTCGCTATTGTAAAATTCATGT TATATGGAGGGGGCA-30 Cells were seeded on coverslips (VWR 48366-067) in a 6-well plate and let adhere overnight. Transfections using Lipofectamine 3000 Transfection Reagent with designated plasmids were incubated overnight. Subsequent processing follows available Stellaris RNA FISH protocol for adherent cells. The cells were fixed in Fixation Buffer (3.7% (vol./vol) formaldehyde, 1X PBS) for 10 min at RT. After three washes with PBS, cells were permeabilized for 1 hour at 4 C with 70% (vol./vol.) ethanol. Cells were incubated at RT for 25 min with Wash Buffer A (10% (vol./vol.) formamide, Stellaris RNA FISH Wash buffer A (LGC Biosearch Technologies SMF-WA1-60)). Coverslips were transferred into a humidified chamber cell side down over 100 uL drop of Hybridization Buffer (10% vol./vol.) formamide, Stellaris RNA FISH Hybridization Buffer (LGC Biosearch Technologies SMF-HB1-10)) containing probe specific to U2OS 2-63 Lac array reporter rabbit beta-globin intron-exon module, sealed with parafilm, and incubated in the dark for 16 hours at 37 C. All incubations that follow were performed in the dark. Coverslips were washed with Wash Buffer A and incubated at 37 C for 30 mins. The cells were stained with 1:5000 Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher, 62249) diluted in Wash Buffer A and incubated for 30 min at 37 C. Coverslips were washed once in Wash Buffer B (LGC Biosearch Technologies SMF-WB1-20) incubated at RT for 2-5 mins. Coverslips were mounted on slides (VWR 10144-820) with Vectashield (VWR 101098-042). Coverslips were sealed with nail polish (VWR 100491-940) and stored at 4 C. Microscopy Images were acquired using a Hamamatsu ORCA-Fusion C14440 digital camera and a CSU-W1 Yokogawa Spinning Disk Field Scanning Confocal System, and a 60x Plan Apo Lambda Oil Immersion objective (NA, 1.40). Thickness of Z-slices were 0.2 mm. Exposure time and laser intensity were the same for samples imaged in parallel. Laser lines used: 405nm, 488 nm, 561 nm, and 640 nm. Processing coverslips of co-transfected cells After cells were transfected and allowed to recover, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (VWR BT140770) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark (plate wrapped with foil). After three washes in PBS for 10 min, samples were permeabilized with 0.5% triton X100 (Sigma T9284) in PBS for 10 min at RT. Then cells were incubated with 1:5000 Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher, 62249) in Milli-Q water at RT in the dark (5 min). After washing once more with water, coverslips were mounted on slides (VWR 10144-820) with Vectashield (VWR 101098-042). Coverslips were sealed with nail polish (VWR 100491-940) and stored at 4 C. Microscopy analysis Partition coefficient The partition coefficient was calculated by measuring the integrated fluorescence at the Lac array locus core as defined by fluorophore fused to LacI (highest intensity range on the Z-slice) and at a proximal spot in the nucleus (background) using FIJI 2D measurement tools and ROI tools. The same ROI area was used to measure the fluorescence at both background and focus. The quotient of these values (arbitrary units) was calculated as raw intensity at locus divided by raw intensity in the surrounding background. Manders coefficients were calculated using CellProfiler. The analysis pipeline identified individual cells based on Hoescht staining and masked channels. All images analyzed per experiment were treated with CelProfiler’s Robust background or Otsu thresholding. The channels for immunofluorescence (MED1 or FUS and other proteins of interest) were analyzed per identified nuclei and a Manders coefficient was calculated per cell using MED1 or FUS as the channel of reference. Profile plots Intensity line profiles of fluorescent signal on a line ( 3 mm) across the CFP focus were drawn using FIJI and saved in ROI manager for use in all samples. The values outside the CFP focus were taken as reference to normalize the rest of the data by averaging the first and last 5 data points and using a quotient between the rest of the data points and this average. Control and experiment cells containing comparable levels of fluorescent intensity signal were considered for analysis. FUS and MED1 IDR parametric analysis The IDR region of MED1 and FUS is denoted by the MobiDB database. A 10 amino acid sliding window heatmap for different amino acid fractions for both IDRs were plotted (Figure 1D). MobiDB and Metapredict disorder fraction for the IDR region is predicted by taking an average of each amino acid score for the entire region. The website available version of PSPredictor and FUZdrop were used to plot the disorder values. Basic, acidic, Y, and Q fractions were calculated using LocalCIDER. A log2 relative ratio of MED1/FUS and FUS/MED1 was plotted for each IDR parameters (Figure 1B).

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

e7

[Page 25]

Proteomic data analysis We used the cell-free method mass spectrometry data for MED1IDR and FUSIDR fractions to calculate the fold enrichment between the pellet (P) and the supernatant (S) fractions (n=3). Pellet to supernatant fraction (P/S) values were used to determine the top 10% pellet-enriched proteins in each replicate. We used the cell-based method mass spectrometry data for MED1IDR and FUSIDR fractions to calculate the fold enrichment between the light (L) and the Heavy (H) media fractions(n=2). Light to Heavy fraction (L/H) values >=2 was used as the top enriched proteins in each replicate. The overlap of top enriched proteins from the extract method and apex method for MED1IDR and FUSIDR replicates showed values of 91 and 93 respectively (Table S2). Percentile rank was calculated for MED1IDR and FUSIDR P/S scores from the pellet data to plot a heatmap for the selected candidates. Average percentile rank between replicates was used to determine the selective partitioning of proteins into each condensate. A protein was considered to be selectively partitioned if the average percentile rank was greater than the 90th percentile in the given condensate, while it was less than the 90th percentile in the other condensate. Based on this criterion, we have divided these overlapping proteins into three categories 1) FUSIDR differentially partitioned (61), MED1IDR differentially partitioned (72), non-differentially partitioned proteins (41). Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed for selectively partitioned proteins using PANTHER Overrepresentation Test (v16.0) with slim molecular function and slim biological process categories followed by Fisher’s exact test. We also, performed the same analysis by using all detected proteins from both apex and extract method as background. Analysis of protein and IDR features from proteomics data Pfam enrichment analysis We generated a list of Pfam IDs for all UniProt-reviewed proteins and performed a Fisher’s exact test to compare the number of Pfam domains present in selectively partitioned proteins of MED1IDR and FUSIDR condensates to the total number of Pfam domains present in all UniProt-reviewed proteins. Pfam domains with P-value <= 0.0001 were considered as the enriched Pfam domains for selectively partitioned proteins of MED1IDR and FUSIDR condensates. Generating IDRome table for all uniport reviewed proteins in humans with sequence parameters We generated a table of IDR ranges for all UniProt-reviewed proteins by considering the Metapredict(v2.3) IDR database predicted ranges. The minimum length cutoff used to define an IDR was 100 amino acids. For each predicted consensus IDR sequence, we obtained the following sequence parameters: IDR length, NCPR, FCR, disorder promoting fraction, kappa, acidic fraction, basic fraction, aromatic patterning (U_aro), SCD, and fraction of all amino acids using the localCIDER algorithm. The number of charge blocks was defined as described in Lyons et al.16. Using the Metapredict IDR definition (>=100 amino acids) we defined whether a selectively partitioned protein in MED1IDR and FUSIDR condensate contains at least one IDR. The comparisons boxplots for each parameter were compared with all IDRs (>=100 amino acids) predicted by Metapredict for UniProt-reviewed proteins as IDRome. Protein expression and purification The DNA fragments encoding the protein region of interest were cloned into a modified T7 pET expression vector, resulting in the protein having N-terminal 6xHis mEGFP or mCherry (see key resources table and Table S1) followed by a 14 amino acid linker sequence ‘‘GAPGSAGSAAGGSG’’ before the protein region of interest. NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix (NEB E2621L) was used to insert the DNA sequence in-frame with the linker sequence. The generated construct was transformed into NEB 5-alpha Competent E. coli (C2987H) and plasmids were isolated from a selected bacterial colony. Sequence identity was confirmed using sanger sequencing or long-read sequencing. NiCo21(DE3) Competent E. coli cells (NEB C2529H) were transformed with the bacterial expression plasmids described above. Transformed colonies were grown in LB media at 37 C on a rotating shaker (250 rpm) until OD600 of 0.6 was reached. Following 1mM of Isopropyl ß-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG, Sigma 70527) induction for protein expression, the bacterial culture was incubated at room temperature for 16 hours. All bacterial pellets were collected by spinning the culture at 14000 rpm at 4 C for 30 minutes in a Sorvall Rc6+ centrifuge. The pellet was lysed and dissolved using 30 mL of lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 500mM NaCl, 5mM b-mercaptoethanol) supplemented with cOmplete EDTA free 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001). Dissolved pellets were subjected to sonication on ice using a Branson Digital Sonifier 250 at 50% amplitude with 5 second bursts followed by 10 second cooling period until homogenous lysate was obtained. The lysate was centrifuged at 18000 rpm at 4 C for 30 minutes. During the lysate centrifugation step, HisPur Ni-NTA resin (FisherScientific PI88222) was equilibrated with lysis buffer. The supernatant from the bacterial lysate was collected and incubated with the equilibrated resin for 1 hour at 4 C, after which the mixture was poured into empty polypropylene columns (Bio-Rad 7311550). Wash buffer (50mM Tris, 2.5 M NaCl, 5mM BME, 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)) was applied to the column prior to elution with elution buffer (50 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM BME, 500 mM imidazole, and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail). mEGFP-MED1IDR was purified by cation exchange chromatography on UNO S6 column (Bio-Rad 7200023) using Buffer A (50 mM Tris, 5 mM BME) and Buffer B (50 mM Tris, 5 mM BME, 1M NaCl). Fractions (0.5 mL each) containing purified protein were collected. For mEGFP and mCherry tagged FUSIDR proteins, size exclusion chromatography was performed by FPLC (Bio-Rad NGC quest) with an ENrich SEC 650 10 x 300 column (Bio-Rad 7801650) in buffer containing 50 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl and 5mM BME. Next, all proteins were dialyzed against protein storage buffer (50 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT) overnight at 4 C. The concentration of dialyzed protein was

e8

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

[Page 26]

calculated by reading A280 on a spectrophotometer (DeNovix, DS-11 FX+). The purified proteins were either used immediately or stored at -80 C. In vitro droplet assay To test droplet forming ability of purified recombinant protein mEGFP-MED1IDR and mEGFP-FUSIDR (Figure 1C) protein (10mM) was mixed with 10% final concentration of polyethylene glycol 8000 solution (50 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT). The mixture was prepared in the protein storage buffer (50 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1mM PMSF, and 1 mM DTT) and immediately loaded onto a homemade chamber comprising coverslip attached to a glass slide by parallel strips of double-sided tape. Droplets that settled on the coverslip were imaged using a Hamamatsu ORCA-Fusion C14440 digital camera and a CSU-W1 Yokogawa Spinning Disk Field Scanning Confocal System equipped with a Super Resolution by Optical Pixel Reassignment (SoRa) module. Images were acquired using a 60x Plan Apo Lambda Oil Immersion objective (NA, 1.40) with SoRa engaged. QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS GraphPad Software was used for statistical analysis. GraphPad notation for p values was used on our reports: (ns p > 0.05, *p % 0.05, **p % 0.01 *** p % 0.001, ****p % 0.0001). Details on statistical test used and sample size are provided in the figure legends.

Molecular Cell 84, 3497–3512.e1–e9, September 19, 2024

e9
