[Page 1]

Functional partitioning of transcriptional regulators by patterned charge blocks Graphical abstract

Authors

Selective partitioning of positive regulators of RNA Polymerase II positive regulators

negative regulators

Heankel Lyons, Reshma T. Veettil, Prashant Pradhan, ..., Mikayla Eppert, Robert G. Roeder, Benjamin R. Sabari

Correspondence benjamin.sabari@utsouthwestern.edu

RNA Polymerase II Charge pattern in disordered regions drives selective partitioning − − − −

− − − − − − − − − − − −

− − − − − − − − − − − − − − −

− − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − −

− − − − − − −

− − − − − − − −

− − − − − − − −

− − − − −

− − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − − −

−

remove pattern

add pattern − − − − − − − − −

− − − − −

− − − − − − − −

− − − − − − − − − − − − − −

−

− −

− − − − − − −

−

− − −

− − − −

− − −

− − −

− − − −

− − −

− − − − − − −

− − − − −

In brief Charge patterning in disordered regions of transcriptional regulators mediates selective partitioning into MED1IDR condensates for gene activation.

− − −

−

Selective partitioning regulates gene activation

gene promoter enhancer

Highlights

Disorder-mediated selective partitioning regulates gene activation

Disordered regions are necessary and sufficient for selective partitioning

Charge patterning in disordered regions is required for specificity of partitioning

Disordered regions with similar patterning have similar partitioning and function

Lyons et al., 2023, Cell 186, 327–345 January 19, 2023 a 2022 Elsevier Inc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.12.013

[Page 2]

Functional partitioning of transcriptional regulators by patterned charge blocks Heankel Lyons,1,3 Reshma T. Veettil,1,3 Prashant Pradhan,1,3 Christy Fornero,1 Nancy De La Cruz,1 Keiichi Ito,2 Mikayla Eppert,1 Robert G. Roeder,2 and Benjamin R. Sabari1,4,* 1Laboratory of Nuclear Organization, Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive Biology Sciences, Division of Basic Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Molecular Biology, Hamon Center for Regenerative Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA 2Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA 3These authors contributed equally 4Lead contact *Correspondence: benjamin.sabari@utsouthwestern.edu https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.12.013

SUMMARY

Components of transcriptional machinery are selectively partitioned into specific condensates, often mediated by protein disorder, yet we know little about how this specificity is achieved. Here, we show that condensates composed of the intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of MED1 selectively partition RNA polymerase II together with its positive allosteric regulators while excluding negative regulators. This selective compartmentalization is sufficient to activate transcription and is required for gene activation during a cell-state transition. The IDRs of partitioned proteins are necessary and sufficient for selective compartmentalization and require alternating blocks of charged amino acids. Disrupting this charge pattern prevents partitioning, whereas adding the pattern to proteins promotes partitioning with functional consequences for gene activation. IDRs with similar patterned charge blocks show similar partitioning and function. These findings demonstrate that disorder-mediated interactions can selectively compartmentalize specific functionally related proteins from a complex mixture of biomolecules, leading to regulation of a biochemical pathway.

INTRODUCTION Transcription is a multi-step process requiring the recruitment of dozens of proteins to specific genomic loci.1,2 Many of these components form dynamic local concentrations correlating with transcriptional activity3–17; yet, we know little about how the multiple components required for transcription are selectively concentrated. Here, we refer to these high local concentrations of the transcription machinery as condensates.18 While the exact physicochemical process underlying transcriptional condensate formation is unresolved, there is general agreement that weak multivalent interactions drive their assembly.19–21 How specificity in condensate composition is achieved by weak multivalent interactions remains a major unanswered question. Weak multivalent interactions among components of the transcriptional machinery, in particular those mediated by intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), have long been understood to be important for transcription.22,23 Recently, specific pairwise interactions among IDRs have been documented for candidate factors in the context of condensates.11,12,14,24 Significant work has also been done on dissecting the molecular underpinnings of IDR self-association, with RNA-binding proteins being among the most comprehensively characterized.25–32 These studies conclude that multivalency and patterning of diverse

types of interactions along the sequence of these IDRs are important for condensate formation. Because most studies focused on self-association or partitioning of candidate factors, general principles for selective partitioning in the context of a complex cellular environment remain elusive. In this study, we aim to perform unbiased identification of partitioned proteins to uncover sequence features that engender specificity. Toward that goal, we focus on identifying and characterizing proteins that selectively partition into condensates composed of the largest IDR within the Mediator complex: MED1IDR. We focus on MED1IDR as a case study to investigate selective partitioning mediated by protein disorder and its functional consequences for two key reasons. First, the Mediator coactivator complex is a central hub of interactions critical for gene activation,33–36 and disordered portions of several Mediator subunits are thought to play a role in these interactions.37,38 The largest IDR in the complex is on subunit MED1 and has been implicated in the formation of condensates involved in gene activation in both cell-based and in vitro systems,11,12,24,39,40 providing us with biochemical and cell-based assays to investigate selective partitioning. Second, while Med1 knockout (KO) mice are embryonic lethal,41 KO cells grow in culture42,43 but are unable to undergo certain cell-state transitions including adipogenesis,42 providing us with a cell-state transition model to examine the Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 a 2022 Elsevier Inc. 327

[Page 3]

functional role of selective partitioning. Here, we investigate the interactions and function of this case study IDR in cell-free reconstitutions, an engineered cell reporter, and the adipocyte cell-state transition. Here, we show that MED1IDR condensates reconstituted in a cell-free lysate selectively partition positive regulators of transcription while excluding negative regulators. High local concentration of MED1IDR at a specific genomic locus partitions these positive regulators and activates transcription in cells. The IDRs of positive regulators of transcription are necessary and sufficient for selective partitioning, which is driven by the patterning of charged residues into alternating blocks of charge in these IDRs. Manipulating the charge pattern of IDRs or swapping IDRs can retarget partitioning in cells, leading to changes in function. IDRs with similar charge patterning to MED1IDR exhibit similar selective partitioning and function, demonstrating that these findings are applicable beyond MED1 and represent general principles for how proteins are sorted into different condensates. While we identify specific feature patterns for a transcriptional pathway, it is likely that other biochemical pathways where IDRs play a role in compartmentalization will have evolved their own set of feature patterns that facilitate the sorting of proteins into the various cellular condensates. RESULTS MED1IDR condensates selectively partition positive regulators of transcription To investigate selective partitioning of IDR-mediated condensates, we focused on MED1IDR (Figure 1A; Table S1), which forms condensates when added to a soluble nuclear extract (Figure 1B, STAR Methods). These condensates were isolated by centrifugation, which fractionates the extract into a pellet containing proteins partitioned into MED1IDR condensates and a supernatant (sup) containing proteins not partitioned (Figure 1C). By proteomic analysis of pellet and supernatant fractions, we calculated a partition ratio, defined as pellet over supernatant (pellet/sup) for every identified protein in the extract (Table S2). Gene ontology analysis of highly partitioned proteins showed enrichment for positive regulation of RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) transcription (Figure S1A). Among these positive regulators of RNA Pol II transcription are SPT6, IWS1, and CTR9 (along with all subunits of the PAF1 complex), as well as subunits of RNA Pol II (Figures 1D and S1B). Among the least partitioned proteins were proteins known to form distinct nuclear condensates (e.g., HP1a in heterochromatin, NPM1 in nucleoli, etc.), demonstrating the selectivity of partitioning in this assay (Figures 1D and S1B). Proteomics data were corroborated by immunoblot analysis of an independent fractionation experiment with an additional control of not adding MED1IDR to ensure pelleting was due to MED1IDR. RPB1 (largest subunit of RNA Pol II), CTR9, SPT6, and IWS1 were only in the pellet fraction in the presence of MED1IDR while FUS and PTBP1, RNA-binding proteins implicated in nuclear condensates, remained in the supernatant (Figure 1E), confirming that specific positive regulators of transcription are selectively partitioned by MED1IDR condensates in vitro. To investigate whether the identified proteins were specific to MED1IDR condensates, we analyzed published data45 from a

328 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

similar fractionation experiment with NPM1. For the 200 most partitioned proteins by either NPM1 or MED1IDR condensates, 92% of proteins are unique (Figure S1C). Importantly, no positive regulators of RNA Pol II were in the NPM1 condensate dataset nor were the NPM1-partitioned nucleolar proteins found in our MED1IDR dataset (Figure S1D), providing evidence that the proteins partitioned by MED1IDR condensates are specific. Given that MED1IDR condensates selectively partition positive allosteric regulators of RNA Pol II, which function in opposition to the negative elongation factor (NELF) complex,46 we next investigated the partitioning of NELF. The interactions of RNA Pol II with CTR9 and SPT6 or with the NELF complex are mutually exclusive, and each provides distinct conformations leading to active or inactive states for RNA Pol II.47,48 In our proteomics dataset, NELF subunits were neutral or depleted from the MED1IDR pellet fraction (Figure S1B). Immunoblots of an independent experiment confirmed that nearly all RPB1, CTR9, SPT6, or IWS1 were in the MED1IDR pellet fraction (relative to the input signal), whereas the NELFB subunit was only modestly detected (Figure 1F). While NELF is capable of forming condensates,49 our data suggest that MED1IDR condensates have a strong bias for partitioning positive regulators over NELF. To investigate whether endogenous MED1 colocalizes with partitioned proteins in cells, we performed co-immunofluorescence (co-IF). Co-IF of MED1 with partitioned proteins RPB1, CTR9, or SPT6 revealed a significant signal overlap with MED1 foci, while excluded factors showed a relatively lower signal overlap (Figures 1G and 1H). These data show that at endogenous protein concentrations, MED1 foci colocalize with RPB1, CTR9, and SPT6 (Figure 1I). High levels of MED1 occupancy at enhancers correlate with increased RPB1, CTR9, SPT6, and transcription at associated genes To investigate the relative chromatin occupancy of MED1 to RNA Pol II, CTR9, and SPT6, we analyzed published chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) datasets. Clusters of enhancers with high MED1 occupancy are termed ‘‘super-enhancers’’ and represent condensates in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs).11,50 Using ChIP-seq datasets from mESCs11,51,52 and annotations for super-enhancers,53 the gene body occupancy of RPB1, CTR9, or SPT6 was highest for genes near enhancers with the largest MED1 occupancy (Figures 2A and S2A). NELFA ChIPseq data52 did not follow this trend (Figures 2A and S2A). Furthermore, genes with highest MED1 occupancy at their enhancers had highest RPB1, CTR9, and SPT6 occupancy at their gene bodies with an apparent threshold level of MED1 (Figure 2B), supporting a model where genomic loci with the highest MED1 occupancy—above an apparent threshold— partition proteins identified as constituents of MED1IDR condensates. We next asked whether this increase in occupancy of positive regulators of transcription was associated with increased RNA Pol II activity and rates of transcription. Phosphorylation of RNA Pol II at S5 or S2 is associated with RNA Pol II activity.54 Genes associated with enhancers with high MED1 occupancy had higher levels of gene body S5ph and S2ph (Figures S2B–S2D).

[Page 4]

Figure 1. MED1IDR condensates selectively partition positive regulators of transcription from a nuclear extract (A) Consensus MobiDB disorder prediction44 for MED1. The MED1IDR (orange) was purified as an mEGFP fusion (STAR Methods). (B) Purified mEGFP-MED1IDR forms droplets in the nuclear extract (STAR Methods). Scale bars, 5 mm. (C) Illustration of pelleting experiment. (D) Heatmap of log2(pellet/sup) values from proteomics analysis. See also Figure S1B. (E) Immunoblot of input, supernatant, or pellet fractions in the presence or absence of MED1IDR using indicated antibodies. (F) Immunoblot of input and pellet fraction in the presence or absence of MED1IDR using indicated antibodies. (G) Co-immunofluorescence (co-IF) against MED1 (cyan) and indicated proteins (magenta). Scale bars, 5 mm. (H) Manders overlap coefficient per cell from co-IF shown in (G). Mean ± SEM. p values, one-way ANOVA. (I) Illustration summarizing observed selective partitioning by MED1IDR condensates. See also Figure S1.

RNA Pol II is regulated by NELF-mediated promoter-proximal pausing which can be assessed by the traveling ratio.55 The lower the ratio, the less often RNA Pol II is found paused at promoters relative to elongating within gene bodies. Strikingly, genes with the highest MED1 occupancy at their enhancers had lower traveling ratios (Figure S2E). Consistent with having higher occupancy of positive regulators and lower pausing, genes with the highest MED1 occupancy at their enhancers had higher rates of transcription, as measured by GRO-seq56 (Figure 2C), with the same apparent threshold observed for the ChIP signal (Figure 2B). These data support a model where high local concentration of MED1 partitions RNA Pol II and its positive allosteric regulators, leading to a greater frequency of assembling elongation-competent RNA Pol II and, therefore, higher rates of transcription.

High local concentration of MED1IDR is sufficient to partition positive regulators and activate gene transcription in cells To investigate whether MED1IDR is sufficient to selectively partition positive regulators of transcription when recruited to a specific genomic locus, we used the U2OS 2-6-3 cell line,57 which contains an integrated LacO array (hereafter referred to as Lac array cells) and compared cells transfected with either CFP-LacI or CFP-LacI-MED1IDR (Figure 2D). In Lac array cells, the immunofluorescence (IF) signal for the positive regulators of transcription identified in the extract fractionation was enriched at CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci relative to the control (Figures 2E–2H). NELFB showed the opposite result (Figures 2E–2H). Interestingly, the IF signal for the positive regulators was observed only in the brightest CFP-LacI-MED1IDR

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 329

[Page 5]

Figure 2. High local concentration of MED1IDR is sufficient to partition positive regulators and activate gene transcription in cells (A) Metagene plots for indicated ChIP-seq datasets for genes proximal to annotated enhancers in mESCs that either have high (orange) or low (gray) MED1 occupancy. (B) LOESS polynomial fit curve for scatter plots of ChIP-seq read densities at gene bodies ranked by MED1 occupancy at each gene’s annotated enhancer. (C) Same as (B) but for GRO-seq data for mESCs. (D) Schematic of Lac array cells. (E) IF for indicated proteins (magenta) in Lac array cells expressing indicated LacI fusion. Scale bars, 5 mm. (F) Scatter plots of RPB1 IF (Y axis) against CFP (X axis) for foci of CFP-LacI (gray) or CFP-LacI-MED1IDR (orange).

(legend continued on next page)

330 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

[Page 6]

foci, with an apparent threshold amount of MED1IDR required for partitioning (Figures 2F–2G). These results demonstrate that high concentrations of MED1IDR at a defined genomic locus recapitulate its selective partitioning observed in the nuclear extract. We next investigated whether recruitment of high local concentrations of MED1IDR is sufficient to change the chromatin landscape and activate transcription. Under basal conditions, the Lac array locus is within heterochromatin and transcriptionally silent.57 IF for HP1a or H3K9me3, markers of heterochromatin, showed enrichment at CFP-LacI foci but not at CFP-LacIMED1IDR foci (Figures 2I and 2J). Conversely, the IF signal for H3K27ac, a marker for active chromatin, showed enrichment at CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci (Figures 2I and 2J). The IF signal for RNA Pol II S5ph or S2ph was also enriched at CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci (Figures 2I and 2J). There is a reporter gene with MS2 RNA loop repeats downstream of the LacO array, which can be visualized by mCherry-MCP (Figure 2K).57 We observed enrichment of mCherry-MCP at CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci compared with the control (Figures 2L and 2M). These results demonstrate that a high local concentration of MED1IDR at a specific genomic locus is sufficient to create an active chromatin environment. MED1IDR is necessary for selective partitioning To test whether MED1IDR is necessary for partitioning CTR9 and SPT6, we performed IF for these factors in Lac array cells containing CFP-LacI fusions with either full-length MED1 (FL), MED1 with the IDR region deleted (DIDR), or just MED1IDR (IDR) (Figure 2N). The IF signal for CTR9 and SPT6 was depleted in foci lacking MED1IDR (Figures 2O and 2P), demonstrating that MED1IDR is necessary for partitioning. To investigate whether the Mediator complex was recruited by MED1IDR, we performed IF for MED14, a core subunit of the complex. In agreement with studies showing that MED1 interacts with the Mediator via its N-terminus,37,58 MED14 was only found in FL and DIDR foci (Figures S2F and S2G). In summary, high local concentrations of MED1IDR partition RNA Pol II with its positive regulators, exclude negative regulators, alter chromatin environment, and activate gene transcription (Figure 2Q). MED1IDR and its partitioned proteins are required for gene activation during a cell-state transition To investigate whether MED1IDR is required for gene activation events during a cell-state transition, we used the 3T3-L1 adipogenesis model,59 which requires MED1 for differentiation.60 During differentiation, MED1 is redistributed into new super-enhancers61

(Figures 3A–3C), which activate genes critical for adipogenesis (Figures 3D and 3E). In agreement with these ChIP-seq data, coIF for MED1 and RPB1 or CTR9 showed an increase in the overlap and focus size during differentiation (Figures S3A and S3B), while protein levels were unchanged or reduced (Figure S3C). These data suggest a redistribution of RPB1 and CTR9 into newly formed MED1 foci during differentiation. To test the necessity of MED1 and proteins partitioned by MED1IDR, we performed siRNA knockdown of Med1, Ctr9, Spt6, Iws1, and Nelfb followed by an adipogenesis assay. These transcription regulators are expressed at the same level before and after adipogenesis (Figure S3D), but their expression is significantly reduced by siRNA knockdown (Figure S3F). Knockdown of Med1 led to a reduction in the activation of key adipocyte genes regulated by the largest accumulation of MED1 at newly formed super-enhancers (Figure 3F). Similarly, knockdown of Ctr9 and Spt6 led to a comparable or greater decrease, while knockdown of Iws1 led to a modest decrease (Figure 3F). Interestingly, knockdown of Nelfb led to a modest increase in expression (Figure 3F). These effects were corroborated by BODIPY staining (Figure S3G). To test whether MED1IDR is required for 3T3-L1 differentiation, we used CRISPR-Cas9 to delete MED1IDR. We designed three guide RNAs to target either early exons or the last exon of the Med1 gene (Figures 3G and S3H), leading to frameshift-induced KO or deletion of the IDR (DIDR), respectively (Figure 3H). We confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation that, as expected,58 the MED1-DIDR still interacts with the Mediator complex (Figure S3I). These KO and DIDR cell lines were compared with a non-targeting (NT) control under differentiation conditions (STAR Methods). While the NT cells produced large fat deposits, KO and DIDR cells lacked fat deposits (Figures 3I and S3J). Similarly, expression of key adipocyte genes was activated during differentiation in NT cells but had decreased expression in all KO and DIDR cells (Figure 3J). To ensure that our engineered cells respond to signals in the differentiation media, we tested the expression of genes activated during early adipogenesis (4 h) independently of MED1 and found that all cell populations showed increased expression (Figure S3K). We also performed a time course and found that KO and DIDR cells failed to activate these genes even at later time points (Figure S3L). Taken together, MED1IDR and proteins partitioned into MED1IDR condensates are required for the activation of genes necessary for adipocyte cell-state transition. We next performed RNA-seq of the siRNA and CRISPR cell lines described above (Table S3). By focusing our analysis on

(G) Same as (F) for CTR9. (H) IF quantification of indicated protein at CFP-LacI (gray) or CFP-LacI-MED1IDR (orange). Mean ± SEM. p values, t test. (I) Same as (E) for indicated factors. (J) Same as (H) for indicated factors. (K) Schematic of MS2 repeats in Lac array cells. (L) Cells co-transfected with mCherry-MCP and CFP-LacI or CFP-LacI-MED1IDR. Scale bars, 5 mm. (M) Left: mCherry-MCP relative signal across foci for CFP-LacI (gray) or CFP-LacI-MED1IDR (orange). Right: mean ± SD of central MCP data points (STAR Methods). p value, t test. (N) Diagram of MED1 truncations tested as CFP-LacI fusions. (O) IF for indicated proteins (magenta) in Lac array cells expressing indicated LacI fusion. Zoom in on Lac focus. Scale bars, 1 mm. (P) IF quantification for (O). Mean ± SEM. p values, one-way ANOVA versus CFP-LacI. (Q) Model for function of MED1IDR condensate-mediated partitioning. See also Figure S2.

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 331

[Page 7]

Figure 3. MED1IDR is required for gene activation during a cell-state transition (A) Rank ordered plot of enhancers in untreated 3T3-L1 cells (day 0, D0) ranked by increasing MED1 ChIP-seq signal (RPM). (B) Same as (A) but for 3T3-L1 cells after 2 days (D2) of differentiation. (C) Horizontal bar plot of all genomic regions containing a super-enhancer at D0 or D2 ranked by log2 (MED1_D2/MED1_D0).

(legend continued on next page)

332 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

[Page 8]

genes activated during adipogenesis (STAR Methods), we find that the average effect on the expression for the 3 KO and 3 DIDR cell lines shows a linear correlation (r2 = 0.88) (Figure 3K), demonstrating that deletion of the MED1IDR phenocopies KO of MED1 in our assay conditions. As expected,60,62 only a subset of adipocyte-activated genes is downregulated by Med1 KO or DIDR. By comparing the change in MED1 ChIP-seq to the change in expression for DIDR cells relative to NT cells, we observed that genes most sensitive to loss of MED1IDR are those genes with the largest increase in MED1 occupancy at their associated enhancers (Figure 3L). The same trend is observed for Med1 KO cells (Figure S3M), for Ctr9 and Spt6 knockdown, to a lesser degree for Iws1 knockdown, and in the opposite direction for Nelfb knockdown (Figure S3N). This trend is not observed for the respective control differentiated cell lines (Figures S3M and S3N). Additionally, heatmaps plotting change in expression due to siRNA knockdowns ranked by DIDR/NT show that the most DIDR-sensitive genes are also most sensitive to Ctr9 and Spt6 knockdown (Figures 3M and S3O). Furthermore, DIDR-sensitive genes (average DIDR/ NT < 0.5) are also downregulated in Med1 KO and siRNA knockdown of Med1, Ctr9, and Spt6 (Figure 3N). These RNAseq results further support the conclusion that MED1IDR, CTR9, and SPT6 are operating through a similar pathway with the greatest effects for genes regulated by enhancers with highest MED1 occupancy. IDRs of partitioned factors are sufficient and necessary to recapitulate selective partitioning Analysis of proteomics data revealed that proteins with the highest partition ratio were enriched for IDRs (Figure 4A), which led us to investigate the sufficiency of IDRs for selective compartmentalization into MED1IDR condensates. We purified the terminal IDRs of CTR9 and SPT6 as recombinant mCherry fusions (Figure 4B; Table S1). As negative controls, we purified previously studied IDRs of NELFA, HP1a, and FUS (Figure 4B; Table S1), which were implicated in nuclear condensates49,63–65 and were all neutral or excluded from MED1IDR condensates (Figure 4C). We tested the partitioning of these mCherry IDRs into GFP-MED1IDR droplets in vitro (Figure 4D, STAR Methods) either in the presence of total cellular RNA, which has been shown to stimulate MED1IDR droplet formation66 (Figures 4D–4F), or in the absence of RNA where

MED1IDR will not form droplets on its own (Figures S4A–S4C). No nuclear extract was added. In both experiments, CTR9IDR or SPT6IDR partitions with GFP-MED1IDR droplets (Figures 4E, 4F, S4B, and S4C). Consistent with our proteomics analysis, NELFAtentacle, HP1aIDR, and FUSIDR do not partition into MED1IDR droplets (Figures 4E, 4F, S4B, and S4C). Under these conditions, none of the mCherry fusions form condensates on their own (Figures S4D–S4F). These results demonstrate that CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR are sufficient for selective partitioning into MED1IDR condensates without any other proteins or annotated interaction domains. To corroborate these findings in Lac array cells, we co-transfected CFP-LacI-MED1IDR with mCherry fusions of the same IDRs (Figure 4G). Matching in vitro data, CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR partitioned into MED1IDR foci, while NELFAtentacle, HP1aIDR, and FUSIDR were not partitioned (Figures 4H and 4I). The results were similar when the fusion fluorescent proteins were flipped (Figures S4G–S4I). No partitioning of CTR9IDR or SPT6IDR in CFP-LacI without MED1IDR was observed (Figures S4J–S4L). To test whether the IDRs of CTR9 and SPT6 are necessary for partitioning into MED1IDR foci, we cloned full-length (FL) and IDR deletion (DIDR) (Figure 4J) as mCherry fusions and tested their partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR. FL and IDRs of CTR9 and SPT6 partitioned but DIDR proteins did not (Figures 4K and 4L). These results corroborate in vitro experiments and demonstrate that IDRs are necessary for partitioning. We next tested seven additional IDRs from two classes: (1) IDRs from other highly partitioned proteins from our proteomics data (IWS1, LEO1, and PAF1) and (2) other IDRs implicated in the formation of nuclear condensates (DDX4, NELFE, EWSR1, and p300) (Table S1).14,31,49,67 These IDRs were co-transfected with CFP-LacI-MED1IDR into Lac array cells (Figure S4M). Only the IDRs from highly partitioned proteins (IWS1IDR, LEO1IDR, and PAF1IDR) significantly partitioned into MED1IDR foci above the control (Figures S4N and S4O). DDX4IDR and NELFEtentacle were not different from the control, while EWSR1IDR and p300IDR had lower partitioning than the control. Interestingly, EWSR1IDR and p300IDR are both implicated in positive regulation of transcription14,67 yet are effectively excluded, suggesting specialization among transcriptional condensates (discussion). These results show that even among disordered regions, there is a wide range of partitioning.

(D) Violin plots of the log2 fold change in RNA expression for the genes proximal to top 100 and bottom 100 super-enhancers from Figure 3C. p values, t test. (E) Gene tracks of MED1 and RNA Pol II ChIP-seq and RNA-seq from 3T3-L1 cells. (F) Relative expression of adipocyte genes after knockdown of the indicated transcriptional regulators. Mean ± SD. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. control. (G) Location of sgRNAs for Med1 knockout (KO) and Med1 DIDR (DIDR) cell lines. See also Figure S3H. (H) Immunoblot for N-terminal epitope of MED1 in 3T3-L1 CRISPR-Cas9 engineered cells. (I) Images of CRISPR-Cas9 engineered cell lines stained with BODIPY and DAPI (nuclei). Scale bars, 20 mm. (J) Relative expression of adipocyte genes. Mean ± SD. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. NT. (K) Scatter plot of average FPKM from either the three DIDR cells (y axis) or the three KO cells (x axis) each divided by FPKM from the NT cells for all adipocyteactivated genes. r2 = goodness-of-fit for a linear regression. (L) Adipocyte-activated genes with annotated MED1-occupied enhancers were ranked by the fold increase from D0 to D2 and split into 4 equal bins. Boxplot (10%–90%) of average (DIDR/NT) for each bin. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. first bin. (M) Heatmap of fold change in FPKM for the indicated knockdowns (X axis labels) relative to the siRNA control (‘‘none’’) ranked by decreasing average (DIDR/NT). See also Figure S3O. (N) Boxplot (10%–90%) showing FPKM of KO or DIDR samples (left) or siRNA experiments (right) relative to FPKM of control day 3 differentiated cells for adipocyte-activated genes sensitive to deletion of MED1IDR (DIDR/NT % 0.5). p values, one-way ANOVA vs. NT (left) or ctrl (right). See also Figure S3.

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 333

[Page 9]

Figure 4. IDRs of partitioned factors are sufficient and necessary to recapitulate selective partitioning (A) MED1IDR partitioned proteins are themselves enriched for IDRs. (B) PONDR plots (VSL2). Black bar highlights IDR purified as an mCherry fusion. (C) Proteomics data from MEDIDR pelleting experiments showing replicate log2(pellet/sup) values for each protein. (D) Cartoon depiction of purified mCherry IDRs tested. See also Figure S4A. (E) Images of indicated mCherry-IDR partitioning into mEGFP-MED1IDR droplets in total RNA. Scale bars, 5 mm. See also Figure S4B. (F) Boxplot (10%–90%) of condensed fraction. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control. (G) Cartoon depiction of experimental setup. (H) Images of mCherry IDRs (top row) tested for partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci (bottom row). Scale bars, 5 mm. (I) Boxplot (min–max) of partition coefficients for experiments in (H). p values, one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control. (J) Diagram of CTR9 and SPT6 truncations as mCherry fusions tested for partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR in Lac array cells. (K) Same as (H) but for indicated mCherry fusions. (L) Same as (I) but for indicated mCherry fusions. See also Figure S4.

334 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

[Page 10]

(legend on next page)

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 335

[Page 11]

Selectively partitioned IDRs are enriched for blocks of both positive and negative amino acids To understand the IDR sequence features responsible for the observed selectivity, we compared sequence parameters of IDRs from the most partitioned proteins (partitioned IDRs), IDRs from the least partitioned proteins (excluded IDRs), all IDRs in the proteome (all IDRs) (based on consensus IDR predictions, STAR Methods, Table S4), and all IDRs from proteins identified in the nuclear extract used in our pelleting assays (extract IDRs). As expected, all groups had a similar degree of disorder-promoting amino acids (Figure S5A). Although aromatic residues play a well-documented role in phase separation,26,68 the distributions for aromatic residue fraction or patterning of all groups were similar (Figures S5B and S5C). Partitioned IDRs had a significantly higher fraction of charged amino acids (E, D, R, and K) and a significantly lower fraction of A, G, Q, and P relative to excluded IDRs (Figure S5D). In agreement with these results, partitioned IDRs had a significantly higher fraction of charged residues (FCR) (Figure 5A), fraction of acidic residues (Figure S5E), and fraction of basic residues (Figure S5F), but partitioned IDRs as a group did not show a difference in net charge per residue (NCPR) (Figure S5G). Many of the most partitioned IDRs (e.g., CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR) had striking patterns of local charge density or charge blocks (Figure 5B). Some of these sequences had high kappa values, a measure of charge segregation69; yet as a group, the partitioned IDRs did not have higher kappa (Figure 5SH) but did have a higher value for sequence charge decoration (SCD),70,71 another measure of charge patterning (Figure S5I). To annotate charge blocks, we plotted NCPR for 10-residue sliding windows and defined blocks as any window with NCPR > 0.5 for basic and < 0.5 for acidic, followed by merging overlapping windows of the same charge (STAR Methods). These plots (Figure 5B) for CTR9IDR or SPT6IDR highlight

the striking pattern of alternating charge blocks present throughout these sequences. As a comparison, the NEFLEtentacle, a protein region not partitioned by MED1IDR (Figure S4N), has a similar charge content but lacks the blocky pattern (Figure 5B). By this NCPR block definition, partitioned IDRs have more charge blocks relative to the other groups (Figure 5C). Correlation analysis of partition coefficients for twelve IDRs tested (Figures 4H, 4I, S4N, and S4O) with FCR or the two parameters for charge patterning (kappa and SCD) gave poor fits in a linear regression (r2 < 0.5), but the number of blocks gave the best fit (r2 = 0.81) (Figures 5D, 5E, S5J, and S5K). These data led us to hypothesize that multivalent charge blocks are responsible for preferential partitioning into MED1IDR condensates. Patterning and local density of charged amino acids on CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR are required for selective partitioning To determine whether the pattern of charge is required for partitioning, we modified specific sequence features in CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR and tested their effect on partitioning. Disrupting overall sequence pattern by scrambling the sequence or disrupting acidic and basic content by alanine substitutions for either IDR diminished partitioning relative to the wild-type sequence (Figures 5F–5I). We next made SPT6IDR sequences where (1) only charged residues were scrambled (‘‘charge scramble’’) or (2) only non-charged residues were scrambled (‘‘non-charge scramble’’) in three different versions (Figure 5J). The charge scramble SPT6IDR failed to partition into CFP-LacIMED1IDR foci (Figures 5J and 5K). In agreement with charge pattern driving partitioning, all three non-charge scramble mutants partitioned with MED1IDR (Figures 5J and 5K). Matching the cell-based data, the charge scramble SPT6IDR had diminished partitioning into GFP-MED1IDR droplets, while a

Figure 5. Patterned blocks of acidic and basic residues in IDRs are necessary and sufficient for selective partitioning (A) Partitioned IDRs have a higher FCR than other IDR classes tested. Boxplots (10%–90%). p values, one-way ANOVA vs. partitioned IDRs. (B) NCPR for 10-residue sliding window (black line) across the indicated disordered regions. Vertical red and blue lines represent acidic or basic residues, respectively. Y axis, charge index. The position of acidic or basic blocks (10-residue window NCPR R abs (5)) is shown as dark red bars or dark blue bars, respectively. (C) Same as (A) but for number of charged blocks. (D) Correlation analysis of partition coefficient and FCR for all IDRs tested in Lac array cells (Figures 4I and S4O). r2 = goodness-of-fit for a linear regression. (E) Same as (D) but for number of charged blocks. Red line, linear fit. (F) NCPR plots as in (B) are shown for CTR9IDR and the CTR9IDR mutants tested. (G) Left: images of indicated mCherry fusions and CFP-LacI-MED1IDR. Scale bars, 1 mm. Right: boxplot (10%–90%) of partition coefficients for mCherry-CTR9IDR wild-type and mutants shown on left. P value, one-way ANOVA vs. WT. (H) Same as (F) for SPT6IDR. (I) Same as (G) for SPT6IDR. (J) NCPR plots as in (B) for SPT6IDR charge and non-charge scramble mutants. (K) Same as (G) for indicated SPT6IDR mutants. (L) NCPR plots as in (B) for the middle region of SPT6IDR (ABABA pattern) and block pattern rearrangements of this middle region. (M) Same as (G) but for block pattern mutants. (N) Schematic of synthetic IDR design. See STAR Methods. (O) Illustration of synthetic IDRs tested for partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci in cells and GFP-MED1IDR droplets in vitro. (P) Same as (G) but for synthetic IDRs. (Q) Left: images and quantification of synthetic IDRs partitioning into GFP-MED1IDR droplets in the presence of RNA. Scale bars, 2 mm. Right: boxplot (10%–90%) of condensed fraction of mCherry signal. P values, one-way ANOVA versus no IDR control. (R) NCPR plots as in (B) of NELFEtentacle (WT) and NELFE blocky tentacle (blocky). (S) Same as (G) but with WT and blocky NELFEtentacle. (T) Same as (Q) but with WT and blocky NELFEtentacle. (U) Illustration summarizing observed sufficiency and necessity of alternating charge block pattern for partitioning into MED1IDR condensates. See also Figure S5.

336 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

[Page 12]

non-charge scramble mutant (#3) partitioned like the WT SPT6IDR (Figure S5L). The region within SPT6IDR containing the most striking alternating block pattern (‘‘middle’’) was sufficient for partitioning. Changing the pattern of charge blocks within this middle sequence diminished partitioning (Figures 5L and 5M). These results demonstrate that patterning and local density of charged residues are important for IDRmediated partitioning. We next investigated the conservation of charge block features in CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR. As expected for disordered regions,72,73 the positional sequence identity is poorly conserved, but fraction of disordered amino acids, FCR, kappa values, and the number of charge blocks are conserved (Figures S5M– S5O). Examining the local sequence alignments for individual blocks revealed insertions, deletions, and substitutions which disrupt positional sequence identity but maintain local charge density (Figures S5N–S5P). These results suggest that charge blocks within CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR are conserved even as positional sequence identity diverges across the species analyzed. To understand what types of proteins in the human proteome contain IDRs with charge blocks, we calculated the number of charge blocks in our consensus IDR table (Table S4) and performed gene ontology analysis (STAR Methods). IDRs with the highest number of blocks were enriched for positive regulation of RNA Pol II transcription, while highly charged IDRs without blocks were enriched for cytoskeletal protein binding (Figure S5Q). Charge content and patterning within IDRs are known to be important for phase separation.31,74–76 We tested seven of these IDRs from (1) a set of IDRs from transcriptional repressors (MeCP2, CBX2, KDM1A, and RCOR3) (Figures S5R–S5T) and (2) a set of IDRs known to phase separate by charge-mediated interactions (Ki67, NICD, and NPM1)74,75 (Figures S5U–S5W), and none of these IDRs partitioned into MED1IDR foci in Lac array cells. While each of these IDRs contains their own charge pattern, they do not have the charge pattern features described for IDRs partitioned into MED1IDR condensates. These results highlight that even among charged disordered regions there is specificity for partitioning. Engineered IDRs containing alternating charge blocks selectively partition Having shown that patterned charge blocks are necessary for selective partitioning, we next engineered these features into proteins to confer gain-of-function partitioning. In the first approach, we designed 5 synthetic IDRs based on CTR9 and SPT6 IDRs (Figure 5N; Table S1, STAR Methods). These synthetic IDRs (Figure 5O) partition into MED1IDR foci in cells (Figure 5P) and into MED1IDR droplets in vitro (Figure 5Q). In the second approach, we rearranged the position of charged residues in NELFEtentacle to form an alternating charge block pattern (Figure 5R; Table S1, STAR Methods); no changes were made to the position of non-charged residues. This ‘‘blocky’’ NELFEtentacle partitioned into MED1IDR foci in cells (Figure 5S) and into MED1IDR droplets in vitro (Figure 5T) to a greater extent than the wild-type sequence. These results demonstrate that the patterning of charged residues into alternating blocks allows for selective partitioning into MED1IDR condensates (Figure 5U).

Introducing IDRs with alternating charge blocks into NELFE leads to NELF complex partitioning and a decrease in gene activation We next tested whether replacing the disordered region of NELFE would lead to aberrant partitioning of the NELF complex. We made NELFE chimeras that contain the structured N-terminal region of NELFE, which engages with the complex,48 fused to IDRs with alternating charge blocks or IDRs without this pattern and tested their partitioning into MED1IDR foci in Lac array cells (Figure 6A). These NELFE chimeras behaved as expected, with those containing patterned IDRs partitioning and those containing non-patterned IDRs not partitioning (Figures 6B and 6C). These NELFE chimeras did not partition in the absence of MED1IDR (Figures S6A and S6B). IF for NELFB showed that the NELF complex was recruited to CFP-LacIMED1IDR foci only by patterned NELFE chimeras (Figures 6E and 6F). This aberrant partitioning of NELF by IDR swaps (Figure 6G) diminished reporter gene expression, as measured by a decrease in the MCP signal (Figures 6H and 6I). Partitioning of CTR9IDR or SPT6IDR without NELFE did not decrease the MCP signal (Figures S6C–S6E). These results demonstrate that protein complexes can be spatially organized by sequence features in their IDRs with functional consequences for gene activity. Patterning and local density of charged amino acids on MED1IDR are required for selective partitioning, reporter gene activation, and cell-state transition Having demonstrated the importance of charge blocks for the partitioned IDRs, we next investigated whether the same features were required for MED1IDR function. Similar to CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR, MED1IDR positional sequence identity is not conserved, but disorder, FCR, and the number of charged blocks are conserved (Figures S7A and S7B). While WT MED1IDR formed condensates in the extract, scrambled and charge-to-alaninesubstitution mutants of MED1IDR (Figure 7A) disrupted droplet formation (Figures 7B and 7C). The WT MED1IDR was able to pellet RPB1, CTR9, SPT6, and IWS1 from the extract, but none of the MED1IDR mutants could partition these factors to the same extent (Figure 7D). In Lac array cells, these MED1IDR mutations disrupted partitioning of CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR (Figures 7F, 7G, and S7E), prevented exclusion of HP1aIDR (Figures S7C and S7D), and prevented reporter gene activation (Figures 7F, 7G, and S7F). Using a published strategy of addback complementation in 3T3-L1 cells,60 we expressed MED1 with either WT, RHKtoA, EDtoA, or scramble IDR, or a non-complement control (NC) in Med1 KO clones (Figures 7H and S7G). While MED1 with a wild-type IDR rescued both gene activation (Figure 7I) and adipogenesis (Figures 7J, 7K, and S7I), cells containing MED1 with either RHKtoA, EDtoA, or scramble IDRs were unable to fully rescue either process in two independent Med1 KO clones (Figures S7J–S7L). While the EDtoA mutant exhibited some degree of rescue for the adipocyte genes tested, this construct had only a modest rescue of adipogenesis (Figures 7K and S7L). These data demonstrate that the patterning and local density of charged amino acids on MED1IDR are required for selective partitioning, reporter gene activation, and cell-state transition.

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 337

[Page 13]

Figure 6. Introducing IDRs with alternating charge blocks in NELFE leads to NELF complex partitioning and a decrease in gene activation (A) Schematic showing NELFE chimeras. Checkmark or X on the right indicates whether the fused IDR partitions into MED1IDR condensates. (B) Representative images of NELFE chimeras as mCherry fusions partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci. Scale bars, 1 mm. (C) Boxplot (10%–90%) of partition coefficients for experiments shown in (B). p values, one-way ANOVA vs. no IDR control. (D) Illustration showing the partitioning or not of NELFE chimeras and consequently the recruitment or not of other NELF subunits. (E) Representative images of NELFB immunofluorescence. Scale bars, 1 mm. (F) NELFB IF quantification for experiments in (E). Mean ± SEM. p values, t test for each pair of NELFE chimeras. (G) Illustration of how NELF is expected to be aberrantly partitioned into MED1IDR condensates when its wild-type tentacle is replaced by IDRs with alternating charge blocks, leading to a decrease in gene activation. (H) Representative images showing the MCP signal. Scale bars, 1 mm. (I) MCP signal quantification (line profile method as Figure 2M) in CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci from experiments in (H). Mean ± SEM. p values, t test for each pair of NELFE chimeras. See also Figure S6.

338 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

[Page 14]

(legend on next page)

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 339

[Page 15]

IDRs with similar block patterns have similar partitioning and function To test whether other IDRs with charge blocks had similar function to MED1IDR, we tested three IDRs containing alternating charge blocks (CDK12IDR, CTR9IDR, and SPT6IDR), two control IDRs where the charged residues were scrambled (charge scramble of CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR), and an IDR depleted of charge blocks (FUSIDR) (Figure S7M). Strikingly, in Lac array cells, the blocky IDRs partitioned CTR9IDR, SPT6IDR, and NELFE blocky tentacle, while the charge scramble controls and FUSIDR did not (Figures 7M, 7N, S7N, and S7O). Exhibiting the same selectivity as MED1IDR, the blocky IDRs did not partition NELFE tentacle (Figures S7L–S7N). Like MED1IDR, CDK12IDR and SPT6IDR were both sufficient to activate the reporter gene but CTR9IDR failed to do so (Figures 7M, 7N, and S7P). We next performed addback experiments with MED1 having its IDR swapped for (1) a blocky IDR (SPT6IDR) or (2) a control IDR without charge blocks (charge scramble of SPT6IDR) (Figures 7O and S7Q). Surprisingly, the MED1-SPT6IDR chimera rescued adipocyte gene activation (Figure 7P) and adipogenesis like the wild-type MED1 (Figures 7Q and 7R). In contrast, the MED1 chimera containing the charge scramble SPT6IDR did not rescue adipocyte gene activation (Figure 7P) or adipogenesis (Figures 7Q and 7R). Notably, SPT6IDR does not share positional sequence identity or linear motifs with MED1IDR but recapitulates the same function. We attempted to test MED1-CDK12IDR chimeras, but they did not express in 3T3-L1 cells. These results show that IDRs with no shared positional sequence identity exhibit similar partitioning and function by nature of their shared charge patterning and demonstrate that the patterning and local charge density on IDRs in general are required for selective partitioning, reporter gene activation, and cell-state transition. DISCUSSION Our results demonstrate that IDR-mediated partitioning can be specific, highlighting the degree of functional specificity en-

coded within IDRs. We propose a model where this functional selectivity facilitates a local environment in which the elongation-competent RNA Pol II complex can be assembled without being challenged by NELF, thereby increasing the rate of RNA Pol II transcription. The formation of these environments will be highly dynamic and their presence and stability at specific genomic loci may relate to the different patterns of frequency and amplitude of transcriptional bursts observed in cells.10,77,78 The regulatory element landscape (i.e., accessible DNA sequence and chromatin state) will determine the local concentration of transcription activators and coactivators locally seeding and scaffolding condensate assembly.79 In support of this model, the amount of H3K27ac at a gene’s associated enhancer positively correlates with burst frequency.77 Multivalent interactions among disordered regions, described here, work together with site-specific structure-mediated interactions (e.g., DNA/ RNA-binding domains, specific protein-protein interaction domains, etc.) to regulate transcription by creating functionally specialized local proteomes at specific loci.21,80,81 While we focus on MED1IDR and a set of other blocky IDRs from transcriptional regulators, other disordered regions will likely partition functionally related proteins with varying degrees of overlap. Interestingly, we find that the IDR of p300, a coactivator known to form condensates,67 does not partition into MED1IDR condensates, suggesting that there are likely different types of transcriptional condensates. Recent data demonstrate that different regulatory elements have specific dependencies for different factors defined by the underlying regulatory element sequence.82–85 Whether these different classes of regulatory elements seed and scaffold distinct types of transcriptional condensates, which would compete for the available RNA Pol II is an exciting topic for future studies. Our study supports a model wherein different condensates partition biomolecules in part by utilizing specific patterns and types of interactions among IDRs. In the context of transcription, several studies have demonstrated that IDRs are sufficient to target proteins to specific genomic loci.40,86,87s There is a great

Figure 7. IDRs with similar alternating charge blocks are required and sufficient for selective partitioning, reporter gene activation, and cellstate transition (A) NCPR plots for MED1IDR and the mutants tested in (B)–(K). (B) Representative images of mEGFP-MED1IDR, scramble, or charge mutants tested for droplet formation in nuclear extract. Scale bars, 2 mm. (C) Quantification of (B). Boxplot (10%–90%) of condensed fraction of GFP signal. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. WT. (D) Immunoblot of pellet fractions in the presence of recombinant mEGFP-MED1IDR, scramble, or charge mutants using indicated antibodies. (E) Cartoon depicting experiments to test mCherry-IDR partitioning and reporter gene activation by MED1IDR mutants. (F) Representative images of partitioning of mCherry fused to CTR9IDR (top set), SPT6IDR (middle set), or MCP (bottom set) into either wild-type or mutant MED1IDR foci (listed across top in cyan) in Lac array cells. Scale bars, 1 mm. (G) Quantification of (F). Left and middle: boxplot of partition coefficients for CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR as Z scores relative to no IDR mCherry control (Figure S7E). Right: bar chart of MCP signal at indicated LacI focus normalized to the background signal, mean ± SD. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. wild-type MED1IDR. (H) Cartoon depiction of 3T3-L1 Med1 KO clone addback experiments with indicated lentiviral constructs. (I) Relative expression of adipocyte genes after induction (day 3) for the indicated addback experiments in Med1 KO clone #15. Mean ± SD. Values are normalized to WT. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. WT. See also Figure S7H. (J) Images of Med1 KO clone #15 + indicated addback construct stained with BODIPY and DAPI. Scale bars, 20 mm. See also Figure S7I. (K) Percentage of BODIPY-stained cells for indicated addback constructs. Mean ± SD. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. WT. (L) Cartoon depicting experiment to test mCherry-IDR partitioning and gene activation by other blocky IDRs and controls. (M) Same as (F) for indicated CFP-LacI and mCherry fusions. (N) Same as (G) for experiments in (M). See also Figures S7M–S7P. (O) Same as (H) for indicated constructs. (P) Same as (I) but with indicated addback constructs. (Q) Same as (J) and (K) but with indicated addback constructs. See also Figure S7.

340 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

[Page 16]

diversity of compositional complexity within IDR sequences that form condensates,25,26,31,74,88 suggesting that there are mechanisms of partitioning yet to be discovered. Even among charged IDRs, the specific patterning and density of charge can be enough to change specificity of partitioning.71,89–94 For example, while condensate formation of DDX4IDR, NICD, MeCP2IDR, Ki67IDR, and NPM1IDR requires patterning of charged residues,31,74–76 these IDRs do not partition into MED1IDR condensates (Figures S4M–S4O and S5R–S5W). This suggests that selective compartmentalization by MED1IDR condensates could be achieved by ‘‘statistical pattern matching,’’ where matched pairs of charge pattern distributions along a disordered heteropolymer enable specificity.92,95,96 Electrostatic pattern matching among disordered proteins in the formation of binary complexes has been experimentally demonstrated.97,98 Interestingly, a theoretical study99 found that even when interactions between components are random, multicomponent fluids segregate into many coexisting phases with distinct compositions, suggesting that the differences in patterns may not need to be stark to ensure selectivity. Given that these functional yet weak interactions are likely dependent on context and on concentration of all components in the complex mixture of the cell, it is likely that most have been missed by standard discovery methods. While we focus on IDRs, it should be noted that condensate formation does not require protein disorder.100,101 Seminal work on condensate formation and composition control has demonstrated a role for multivalent modular structured domain-ligand pairs.100,102 The transcriptional and chromatin machinery contain many domain-ligand pairs where a structured domain of a protein binds to a short linear motif (SLiM) on a partner protein. A recent study discovered a new type of domain-SLiM interaction enriched in transcriptional elongation machinery,103 suggesting that there are others to be discovered. The IDR-IDR interactions described here likely work together with domain-SLiM interactions to create networks of interactions, enabling selective compartmentalization. Our study demonstrates that multivalent interactions mediated by IDRs can selectively partition functionally related proteins from a complex mixture of proteins. The sequence features required for this selectivity are also required for transcriptional activity. Our findings demonstrate that selective partitioning can be driven by interactions among disordered regions. It remains unknown whether these disordered regions adopt transient structures upon interaction or remain disordered. Our ability to reconstitute selective partitioning with protein regions lacking annotated structure suggests that site-specific structured domain-mediated interactions are not required for specificity. Our work opens the possibility that there are other specific disorder-mediated interactions overlooked by conventional discovery methods and that these types of interactions play a functional role in the spatial organization of biochemical pathways in the cell. Limitations of the study Our study focused on the partitioning of proteins into a condensate composed of an IDR which enabled us to identify previously undescribed interactions but introduced a limitation in that we miss the potential contributions of other regions of MED1 or other IDRs within the Mediator complex. While many proteins partitioned by MED1IDR condensates contain IDRs with multiple

patterned charge blocks, some do not have these features, suggesting that there are other ways proteins can be partitioned. While we demonstrate necessity and sufficiency, we do not uncover how alternating charge blocks enable specificity. Biophysical characterization of these interactions is needed to address how multivalent charge blocks interact to enable selective partitioning. STAR+METHODS Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: d KEY RESOURCES TABLE d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

B Lead contact B Materials availability B Data and code availability d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

B U2OS cells B 3T3-L1 and 293T cells B 3T3-L1 differentiation d METHOD DETAILS

B Nuclear extract preparation B Protein expression and purification B DNA synthesis of IDR cDNA B Pelleting assay B Proteomics B Proteomic data analysis B Western blot B Microscopy B Immunofluorescence B Analysis of mESC sequencing data B Lac array cell methods B Analysis of 3T3-L1 sequencing data B 3T3-L1 model B In vitro droplet assay B Analysis of protein sequence features B Design strategy for artificial IDR sequences B 3T3-L1 addback experiments d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 2022.12.013.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank the UTSW Proteomics Core facility for assistance with mass spectrometry experiments, UTSW Genome Core for assistance in RNA-seq experiments, D’Orso Lab for providing cDNA for NELFE, Vos Lab for providing cDNA for SPT6, Rosen Lab for providing cDNA for NICD, and Banaszynski Lab for an aliquot of H3K9me3 antibody. This work was supported by the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) grant RR190090 to B.R.S. and National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants GM147583 to B.R.S. and DK071900 and CA234575 to R.G.R. K.I. was supported by National Cancer Institute T32 grant CA009673 and by a Japan Society for the Promotion of Science postdoctoral fellowship for research abroad.

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 341

[Page 17]

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization, H.L., R.T.V., P.P., and B.R.S.; methodology, H.L., R.T.V., P.P., C.F., N.D., K.I., and B.R.S.; software, R.T.V.; formal analysis, H.L., R.T.V., P.P., and C.F.; investigation, H.L., R.T.V., P.P., C.F., N.D., K.I., M.E., and B.R.S.; writing – original draft, H.L. and B.R.S.; writing – review & editing, H.L., R.T.V., P.P., C.F., N.D., K.I., M.E., R.G.R., and B.R.S.; visualization, H.L., R.T.V., P.P., C.F., N.D., and B.R.S.; supervision, R.G.R. and B.R.S.; funding acquisition, R.G.R. and B.R.S. DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests. Received: April 25, 2022 Revised: October 15, 2022 Accepted: December 7, 2022 Published: January 4, 2023 REFERENCES

Transcription factors activate genes through the phase-separation capacity of their activation domains. Cell 175, 1842–1855.e16. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.042. 13. Cho, W.K., Spille, J.H., Hecht, M., Lee, C., Li, C., Grube, V., and Cissé, I.I. (2018). Mediator and RNA polymerase II clusters associate in transcription-dependent condensates. Science 361, 412–415. https://doi.org/ 10.1126/science.aar4199. 14. Chong, S., Dugast-Darzacq, C., Liu, Z., Dong, P., Dailey, G.M., Cattoglio, C., Heckert, A., Banala, S., Lavis, L., Darzacq, X., and Tjian, R. (2018). Imaging dynamic and selective low-complexity domain interactions that control gene transcription. Science 361, eaar2555. https://doi.org/10. 1126/science.aar2555. 15. Cissé, I.I., Izeddin, I., Causse, S.Z., Boudarene, L., Senecal, A., Muresan, L., Dugast-Darzacq, C., Hajj, B., Dahan, M., and Darzacq, X. (2013). Realtime dynamics of RNA polymerase II clustering in live human cells. Science 341, 664–667. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1239053. 16. Iborra, F.J., Pombo, A., Jackson, D.A., and Cook, P.R. (1996). Active RNA polymerases are localized within discrete transcription ‘‘factories’ in human nuclei. J. Cell Sci. 109, 1427–1436. https://doi.org/10.1242/ jcs.109.6.1427.

2. Cramer, P. (2019). Organization and regulation of gene transcription. Nature 573, 45–54. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1517-4.

17. Izeddin, I., Récamier, V., Bosanac, L., Cissé, I.I., Boudarene, L., DugastDarzacq, C., Proux, F., Bénichou, O., Voituriez, R., Bensaude, O., et al. (2014). Single-molecule tracking in live cells reveals distinct targetsearch strategies of transcription factors in the nucleus. Elife 3, e02230. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02230.

3. Jackson, D.A., Hassan, A.B., Errington, R.J., and Cook, P.R. (1993). Visualization of focal sites of transcription within human nuclei. EMBO J. 12, 1059–1065.

18. Banani, S.F., Lee, H.O., Hyman, A.A., and Rosen, M.K. (2017). Biomolecular condensates: organizers of cellular biochemistry. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 285–298. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm.2017.7.

4. Chen, J., Zhang, Z., Li, L., Chen, B.C., Revyakin, A., Hajj, B., Legant, W., Dahan, M., Lionnet, T., Betzig, E., et al. (2014). Single-molecule dynamics of enhanceosome assembly in embryonic stem cells. Cell 156, 1274–1285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.01.062.

19. Woringer, M., and Darzacq, X. (2018). Protein motion in the nucleus: from anomalous diffusion to weak interactions. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 46, 945–956. https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20170310.

1. Roeder, R.G. (2019). 50+ years of eukaryotic transcription: an expanding universe of factors and mechanisms. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 783–791. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41594-019-0287-x.

5. Mir, M., Reimer, A., Haines, J.E., Li, X.Y., Stadler, M., Garcia, H., Eisen, M.B., and Darzacq, X. (2017). Dense bicoid hubs accentuate binding along the morphogen gradient. Genes Dev. 31, 1784–1794. https:// doi.org/10.1101/gad.305078.117. 6. Mir, M., Stadler, M.R., Ortiz, S.A., Hannon, C.E., Harrison, M.M., Darzacq, X., and Eisen, M.B. (2018). Dynamic multifactor hubs interact transiently with sites of active transcription in Drosophila embryos. Elife 7, e40497. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.40497.

20. Rippe, K. (2022). Liquid–liquid phase separation in chromatin. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 14, a040683. https://doi.org/10.1101/ cshperspect.a040683. 21. Sabari, B.R. (2020). Biomolecular condensates and gene activation in development and disease. Dev. Cell 55, 84–96. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.devcel.2020.09.005. 22. Sigler, P.B. (1988). Transcriptional activation. Acid blobs and negative noodles. Nature 333, 210–212. https://doi.org/10.1038/333210a0.

7. Papantonis, A., and Cook, P.R. (2013). Transcription factories: genome organization and gene regulation. Chem. Rev. 113, 8683–8705. https:// doi.org/10.1021/cr300513p.

23. Fuxreiter, M., Tompa, P., Simon, I., Uversky, V.N., Hansen, J.C., and Asturias, F.J. (2008). Malleable machines take shape in eukaryotic transcriptional regulation. Nat. Chem. Biol. 4, 728–737. https://doi.org/10. 1038/nchembio.127.

8. Tantale, K., Mueller, F., Kozulic-Pirher, A., Lesne, A., Victor, J.M., Robert, M.C., Capozi, S., Chouaib, R., Bäcker, V., Mateos-Langerak, J., et al. (2016). A single-molecule view of transcription reveals convoys of RNA polymerases and multi-scale bursting. Nat. Commun. 7, 12248. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms12248.

24. Guo, Y.E., Manteiga, J.C., Henninger, J.E., Sabari, B.R., Dall’Agnese, A., Hannett, N.M., Spille, J.H., Afeyan, L.K., Zamudio, A.V., Shrinivas, K., et al. (2019). Pol II phosphorylation regulates a switch between transcriptional and splicing condensates. Nature 572, 543–548. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41586-019-1464-0.

9. Tsai, A., Muthusamy, A.K., Alves, M.R.P., Lavis, L.D., Singer, R.H., Stern, D.L., and Crocker, J. (2017). Nuclear microenvironments modulate transcription from low-affinity enhancers. Elife 6, e28975. https:// doi.org/10.7554/eLife.28975.

25. Wang, J., Choi, J.M., Holehouse, A.S., Lee, H.O., Zhang, X., Jahnel, M., Maharana, S., Lemaitre, R., Pozniakovsky, A., Drechsel, D., et al. (2018). A molecular grammar governing the driving forces for phase separation of prion-like RNA binding proteins. Cell 174, 688–699.e16. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.06.006.

10. Cho, W.K., Jayanth, N., English, B.P., Inoue, T., Andrews, J.O., Conway, W., Grimm, J.B., Spille, J.H., Lavis, L.D., Lionnet, T., and Cissé, I.I. (2016). RNA polymerase II cluster dynamics predict mRNA output in living cells. Elife 5, e13617. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13617. 11. Sabari, B.R., Dall’Agnese, A., Boija, A., Klein, I.A., Coffey, E.L., Shrinivas, K., Abraham, B.J., Hannett, N.M., Zamudio, A.V., Manteiga, J.C., et al. (2018). Coactivator condensation at super-enhancers links phase separation and gene control. Science 361, eaar3958. https://doi.org/10.1126/ science.aar3958. 12. Boija, A., Klein, I.A., Sabari, B.R., Dall’Agnese, A., Coffey, E.L., Zamudio, A.V., Li, C.H., Shrinivas, K., Manteiga, J.C., Hannett, N.M., et al. (2018).

342 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

26. Martin, E.W., Holehouse, A.S., Peran, I., Farag, M., Incicco, J.J., Bremer, A., Grace, C.R., Soranno, A., Pappu, R.V., and Mittag, T. (2020). Valence and patterning of aromatic residues determine the phase behavior of prion-like domains. Science 367, 694–699. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw8653. 27. Das, S., Lin, Y.-H., Vernon, R.M., Forman-Kay, J.D., and Chan, H.S. (2020). Comparative roles of charge, p, and hydrophobic interactions in sequence-dependent phase separation of intrinsically disordered proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 28795–28805. https://doi.org/10. 1073/pnas.2008122117.

[Page 18]

28. Fawzi, N.L., Parekh, S.H., and Mittal, J. (2021). Biophysical studies of phase separation integrating experimental and computational methods. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 70, 78–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2021. 04.004.

etic , 44. Piovesan, D., Necci, M., Escobedo, N., Monzon, A.M., Hatos, A., Mic I., Quaglia, F., Paladin, L., Ramasamy, P., Dosztányi, Z., et al. (2021). MobiDB: intrinsically disordered proteins in 2021. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D361–D367. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa1058.

29. Kim, T.H., Payliss, B.J., Nosella, M.L., Lee, I.T.W., Toyama, Y., Forman-Kay, J.D., and Kay, L.E. (2021). Interaction hot spots for phase separation revealed by NMR studies of a CAPRIN1 condensed phase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118. e2104897118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2104897118.

45. Freibaum, B.D., Messing, J., Yang, P., Kim, H.J., and Taylor, J.P. (2021). High-fidelity reconstitution of stress granules and nucleoli in mammalian cellular lysate. J. Cell Biol. 220, e202009079. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb. 202009079.

30. Lin, Y.H., and Chan, H.S. (2017). Phase separation and single-chain compactness of charged disordered proteins are strongly correlated. Biophys. J. 112, 2043–2046. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2017.04.021.

46. Kwak, H., and Lis, J.T. (2013). Control of transcriptional elongation. Annu. Rev. Genet. 47, 483–508. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-genet-110711155440.

31. Nott, T.J., Petsalaki, E., Farber, P., Jervis, D., Fussner, E., Plochowietz, A., Craggs, T.D., Bazett-Jones, D.P., Pawson, T., Forman-Kay, J.D., and Baldwin, A.J. (2015). Phase transition of a disordered nuage protein generates environmentally responsive membraneless organelles. Mol. Cell 57, 936–947. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.013.

47. Vos, S.M., Farnung, L., Boehning, M., Wigge, C., Linden, A., Urlaub, H., and Cramer, P. (2018). Structure of activated transcription complex Pol II–DSIF–PAF–SPT6. Nature 560, 607–612. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41586-018-0440-4.

32. Zhou, X., Sumrow, L., Tashiro, K., Sutherland, L., Liu, D., Qin, T., Kato, M., Liszczak, G., and McKnight, S.L. (2022). Mutations linked to neurological disease enhance self-association of low-complexity protein sequences. Science 377, eabn5582. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. abn5582. 33. Malik, S., and Roeder, R.G. (2010). The metazoan Mediator co-activator complex as an integrative hub for transcriptional regulation. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 761–772. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2901. 34. Soutourina, J. (2017). Transcription regulation by the Mediator complex. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 262–274. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm. 2017.115. 35. Richter, W.F., Nayak, S., Iwasa, J., and Taatjes, D.J. (2022). The Mediator complex as a master regulator of transcription by RNA polymerase II. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 732–749. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41580022-00498-3. 36. Yin, J.W., and Wang, G. (2014). The Mediator complex: a master coordinator of transcription and cell lineage development. Development 141, 977–987. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.098392. 37. Abdella, R., Talyzina, A., Chen, S., Inouye, C.J., Tjian, R., and He, Y. (2021). Structure of the human Mediator-bound transcription preinitiation complex. Science 372, 52–56. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abg3074. 38. Allen, B.L., and Taatjes, D.J. (2015). The Mediator complex: a central integrator of transcription. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 155–166. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm3951. 39. Nair, S.J., Yang, L., Meluzzi, D., Oh, S., Yang, F., Friedman, M.J., Wang, S., Suter, T., Alshareedah, I., Gamliel, A., et al. (2019). Phase separation of ligand-activated enhancers licenses cooperative chromosomal enhancer assembly. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 26, 193–203. https://doi. org/10.1038/s41594-019-0190-5. 40. Zamudio, A.V., Dall’Agnese, A., Henninger, J.E., Manteiga, J.C., Afeyan, L.K., Hannett, N.M., Coffey, E.L., Li, C.H., Oksuz, O., Sabari, B.R., et al. (2019). Mediator condensates localize signaling factors to key cell identity genes. Mol. Cell 76, 753–766.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel. 2019.08.016. 41. Ito, M., Yuan, C.X., Okano, H.J., Darnell, R.B., and Roeder, R.G. (2000). Involvement of the TRAP220 component of the TRAP/SMCC coactivator complex in embryonic development and thyroid hormone action. Mol. Cell 5, 683–693. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80247-6. 42. Ge, K., Guermah, M., Yuan, C.X., Ito, M., Wallberg, A.E., Spiegelman, B.M., and Roeder, R.G. (2002). Transcription coactivator TRAP220 is required for PPARg2-stimulated adipogenesis. Nature 417, 563–567. https://doi.org/10.1038/417563a. 43. El Khattabi, L., Zhao, H., Kalchschmidt, J., Young, N., Jung, S., Van Blerkom, P., Kieffer-Kwon, P., Kieffer-Kwon, K.R., Park, S., Wang, X., et al. (2019). A pliable mediator acts as a functional rather than an architectural bridge between promoters and enhancers. Cell 178, 1145–1158.e20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.011.

48. Vos, S.M., Farnung, L., Urlaub, H., and Cramer, P. (2018). Structure of paused transcription complex Pol II–DSIF–NELF. Nature 560, 601–606. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0442-2. 49. Rawat, P., Boehning, M., Hummel, B., Aprile-Garcia, F., Pandit, A.S., Eisenhardt, N., Khavaran, A., Niskanen, E., Vos, S.M., Palvimo, J.J., et al. (2021). Stress-induced nuclear condensation of NELF drives transcriptional downregulation. Mol. Cell 81, 1013–1026.e11. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.molcel.2021.01.016. 50. Hnisz, D., Shrinivas, K., Young, R.A., Chakraborty, A.K., and Sharp, P.A. (2017). A phase separation model for transcriptional control. Cell 169, 13–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.02.007. 51. Wang, A.H., Juan, A.H., Ko, K.D., Tsai, P.F., Zare, H., Dell’Orso, S., and Sartorelli, V. (2017). The elongation factor Spt6 maintains ESC pluripotency by controlling super-enhancers and counteracting Polycomb proteins. Mol. Cell 68, 398–413.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017. 09.016. 52. Ding, L., Paszkowski-Rogacz, M., Mircetic, J., Chakraborty, D., and Buchholz, F. (2021). The Paf1 complex positively regulates enhancer activity in mouse embryonic stem cells. Life Sci. Alliance 4, e202000792. https://doi.org/10.26508/lsa.202000792. 53. Whyte, W.A., Orlando, D.A., Hnisz, D., Abraham, B.J., Lin, C.Y., Kagey, M.H., Rahl, P.B., Lee, T.I., and Young, R.A. (2013). Master transcription factors and mediator establish super-enhancers at key cell identity genes. Cell 153, 307–319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.035. 54. Phatnani, H.P., and Greenleaf, A.L. (2006). Phosphorylation and functions of the RNA polymerase II CTD. Genes Dev. 20, 2922–2936. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1477006. 55. Rahl, P.B., Lin, C.Y., Seila, A.C., Flynn, R.A., McCuine, S., Burge, C.B., Sharp, P.A., and Young, R.A. (2010). c-Myc regulates transcriptional pause release. Cell 141, 432–445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2010. 03.030. 56. Min, I.M., Waterfall, J.J., Core, L.J., Munroe, R.J., Schimenti, J., and Lis, J.T. (2011). Regulating RNA polymerase pausing and transcription elongation in embryonic stem cells. Genes Dev. 25, 742–754. https://doi.org/ 10.1101/gad.2005511. 57. Janicki, S.M., Tsukamoto, T., Salghetti, S.E., Tansey, W.P., Sachidanandam, R., Prasanth, K.V., Ried, T., Shav-Tal, Y., Bertrand, E., Singer, R.H., and Spector, D.L. (2004). From silencing to gene expression: real-time analysis in single cells. Cell 116, 683–698. https://doi.org/10.1016/ s0092-8674(04)00171-0. 58. Malik, S., Guermah, M., Yuan, C.X., Wu, W., Yamamura, S., and Roeder, R.G. (2004). Structural and functional organization of TRAP220, the TRAP/mediator subunit that is targeted by nuclear receptors. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 8244–8254. https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.24.18.8244-8254.2004. 59. Green, H., and Kehinde, O. (1975). An established preadipose cell line and its differentiation in culture II. Factors affecting the adipose conversion. Cell 5, 19–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(75)90087-2.

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 343

[Page 19]

60. Ito, K., Schneeberger, M., Gerber, A., Jishage, M., Marchildon, F., Maganti, A.V., Cohen, P., Friedman, J.M., and Roeder, R.G. (2021). Critical roles of transcriptional coactivator MED1 in the formation and function of mouse adipose tissues. Genes Dev. 35, 729–748. https://doi.org/10. 1101/gad.346791.120. 61. Siersbæk, R., Madsen, J.G.S., Javierre, B.M., Nielsen, R., Bagge, E.K., Cairns, J., Wingett, S.W., Traynor, S., Spivakov, M., Fraser, P., and Mandrup, S. (2017). Dynamic rewiring of promoter-anchored chromatin loops during adipocyte differentiation. Mol. Cell 66, 420–435.e5. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.molcel.2017.04.010. 62. Siersbæk, R., Rabiee, A., Nielsen, R., Sidoli, S., Traynor, S., Loft, A., Poulsen, L.C., Rogowska-Wrzesinska, A., Jensen, O.N., and Mandrup, S. (2014). Transcription factor cooperativity in early adipogenic hotspots and super-enhancers. Cell Rep. 7, 1443–1455. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.celrep.2014.04.042.

75. Yamazaki, H., Takagi, M., Kosako, H., Hirano, T., and Yoshimura, S.H. (2022). Cell cycle-specific phase separation regulated by protein charge blockiness. Nat. Cell Biol. 24, 625–632. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556022-00903-1. 76. Plys, A.J., Davis, C.P., Kim, J., Rizki, G., Keenen, M.M., Marr, S.K., and Kingston, R.E. (2019). Phase separation of Polycomb-repressive complex 1 is governed by a charged disordered region of CBX2. Genes Dev. 33, 799–813. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.326488.119. 77. Larsson, A.J.M., Johnsson, P., Hagemann-Jensen, M., Hartmanis, L., Faridani, O.R., Reinius, B., Segerstolpe, Å., Rivera, C.M., Ren, B., and Sandberg, R. (2019). Genomic encoding of transcriptional burst kinetics. Nature 565, 251–254. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0836-1. 78. Rodriguez, J., and Larson, D.R. (2020). Transcription in Living Cells: Molecular Mechanisms of Bursting. Annual Review of Biochemistry 89, 189–212. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biochem-011520-105250.

63. Larson, A.G., Elnatan, D., Keenen, M.M., Trnka, M.J., Johnston, J.B., Burlingame, A.L., Agard, D.A., Redding, S., and Narlikar, G.J. (2017). Liquid droplet formation by HP1a suggests a role for phase separation in heterochromatin. Nature 547, 236–240. https://doi.org/10.1038/ nature22822.

79. Shrinivas, K., Sabari, B.R., Coffey, E.L., Klein, I.A., Boija, A., Zamudio, A.V., Schuijers, J., Hannett, N.M., Sharp, P.A., Young, R.A., and Chakraborty, A.K. (2019). Enhancer features that drive formation of transcriptional condensates. Mol. Cell 75, 549–561.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. molcel.2019.07.009.

64. Strom, A.R., Emelyanov, A.V., Mir, M., Fyodorov, D.V., Darzacq, X., and Karpen, G.H. (2017). Phase separation drives heterochromatin domain formation. Nature 547, 241–245. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22989.

80. Sabari, B.R., Dall’Agnese, A., and Young, R.A. (2020). Biomolecular condensates in the nucleus. Trends Biochem. Sci. 45, 961–977. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.tibs.2020.06.007.

65. Patel, A., Lee, H.O., Jawerth, L., Maharana, S., Jahnel, M., Hein, M.Y., Stoynov, S., Mahamid, J., Saha, S., Franzmann, T.M., et al. (2015). A liquid-to-solid phase transition of the ALS protein FUS accelerated by disease mutation. Cell 162, 1066–1077. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell. 2015.07.047.

81. Strom, A.R., and Brangwynne, C.P. (2019). The liquid nucleome - phase transitions in the nucleus at a glance. J. Cell Sci. 132, jcs235093. https:// doi.org/10.1242/jcs.235093.

66. Henninger, J.E., Oksuz, O., Shrinivas, K., Sagi, I., LeRoy, G., Zheng, M.M., Andrews, J.O., Zamudio, A.V., Lazaris, C., Hannett, N.M., et al. (2021). RNA-mediated feedback control of transcriptional condensates. Cell 184, 207–225.e24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.030. 67. Ma, L., Gao, Z., Wu, J., Zhong, B., Xie, Y., Huang, W., and Lin, Y. (2021). Co-condensation between transcription factor and coactivator p300 modulates transcriptional bursting kinetics. Mol. Cell 81, 1682– 1697.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2021.01.031. 68. Vernon, R.M., Chong, P.A., Tsang, B., Kim, T.H., Bah, A., Farber, P., Lin, H., and Forman-Kay, J.D. (2018). Pi-Pi contacts are an overlooked protein feature relevant to phase separation. Elife 7, e31486. https://doi. org/10.7554/eLife.31486. 69. Das, R.K., and Pappu, R.V. (2013). Conformations of intrinsically disordered proteins are influenced by linear sequence distributions of oppositely charged residues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110, 13392–13397. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1304749110. 70. Firman, T., and Ghosh, K. (2018). Sequence charge decoration dictates coil-globule transition in intrinsically disordered proteins. J. Chem. Phys. 148, 123305. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5005821. 71. Lin, Y.H., Brady, J.P., Chan, H.S., and Ghosh, K. (2020). A unified analytical theory of heteropolymers for sequence-specific phase behaviors of polyelectrolytes and polyampholytes. J. Chem. Phys. 152, 045102. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5139661. 72. Brown, C.J., Takayama, S., Campen, A.M., Vise, P., Marshall, T.W., Oldfield, C.J., Williams, C.J., and Dunker, A.K. (2002). Evolutionary rate heterogeneity in proteins with long disordered regions. J. Mol. Evol. 55, 104–110. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00239-001-2309-6. 73. Brown, C.J., Johnson, A.K., and Daughdrill, G.W. (2010). Comparing models of evolution for ordered and disordered proteins. Mol. Biol. Evol. 27, 609–621. https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msp277. 74. Lin, Y., Protter, D.S.W., Rosen, M.K., and Parker, R. (2015). Formation and maturation of phase-separated liquid droplets by RNA-binding proteins. Mol. Cell 60, 208–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2015. 08.018.

344 Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023

82. Haberle, V., Arnold, C.D., Pagani, M., Rath, M., Schernhuber, K., and Stark, A. (2019). Transcriptional cofactors display specificity for distinct types of core promoters. Nature 570, 122–126. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41586-019-1210-7. 83. Serebreni, L., and Stark, A. (2021). Insights into gene regulation: from regulatory genomic elements to DNA-protein and protein-protein interactions. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 70, 58–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceb. 2020.11.009. 84. Alerasool, N., Leng, H., Lin, Z.Y., Gingras, A.C., and Taipale, M. (2022). Identification and functional characterization of transcriptional activators in human cells. Mol. Cell 82, 677–695.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2021.12.008. 85. Neumayr, C., Haberle, V., Serebreni, L., Karner, K., Hendy, O., Boija, A., Henninger, J.E., Li, C.H., Stejskal, K., Lin, G., et al. (2022). Differential cofactor dependencies define distinct types of human enhancers. Nature 606, 406–413. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04779-x. 86. Lu, F., Portz, B., and Gilmour, D.S. (2019). The C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is a multivalent targeting sequence that supports drosophila development with only consensus heptads. Mol. Cell 73, 1232–1242.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2019.01.008. 87. Brodsky, S., Jana, T., Mittelman, K., Chapal, M., Kumar, D.K., Carmi, M., and Barkai, N. (2020). Intrinsically disordered regions direct transcription factor in vivo binding specificity. Mol. Cell 79, 459–471.e4. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.molcel.2020.05.032. 88. Parker, M.W., Kao, J.A., Huang, A., Berger, J.M., and Botchan, M.R. (2021). Molecular determinants of phase separation for Drosophila DNA replication licensing factors. Elife 10, e70535. https://doi.org/10.7554/ eLife.70535. 89. Dinic, J., Marciel, A.B., and Tirrell, M.V. (2021). Polyampholyte physics: liquid-liquid phase separation and biological condensates. Curr Opin Colloid In 54, 101457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cocis.2021.101457. 90. Kapelner, R.A., Yeong, V., and Obermeyer, A.C. (2020). Molecular determinants of protein-based coacervates. Curr Opin Colloid In 52, 101407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cocis.2020.101407. 91. Lin, Y.H., Forman-Kay, J.D., and Chan, H.S. (2018). Theories for sequencedependent phase behaviors of biomolecular condensates. Biochemistry 57, 2499–2508. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.biochem.8b00058.

[Page 20]

92. Lin, Y.-H., Brady, J.P., Forman-Kay, J.D., and Chan, H.S. (2017). Charge pattern matching as a ‘fuzzy’ mode of molecular recognition for the functional phase separations of intrinsically disordered proteins. New J. Phys. 19, 115003. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/aa9369.

108. Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., Batut, P., Chaisson, M., and Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21. https://doi.org/10. 1093/bioinformatics/bts635.

93. Das, S., Amin, A.N., Lin, Y.H., and Chan, H.S. (2018). Coarse-grained residue-based models of disordered protein condensates: utility and limitations of simple charge pattern parameters. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20, 28558–28574. https://doi.org/10.1039/c8cp05095c.

109. Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8.

94. Hazra, M.K., and Levy, Y. (2020). Charge pattern affects the structure and dynamics of polyampholyte condensates. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 22, 19368–19375. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0cp02764b. 95. Chakraborty, A.K. (2001). Disordered heteropolymers: models for biomimetic polymers and polymers with frustrating quenched disorder. Phys. Rep. 342, 1–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0370-1573(00)00006-5. 96. Golumbfskie, A.J., Pande, V.S., and Chakraborty, A.K. (1999). Simulation of biomimetic recognition between polymers and surfaces. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 11707–11712. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96. 21.11707. 97. Schuler, B., Borgia, A., Borgia, M.B., Heidarsson, P.O., Holmstrom, E.D., Nettels, D., and Sottini, A. (2020). Binding without folding – the biomolecular function of disordered polyelectrolyte complexes. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 60, 66–76. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2019.12.006. 98. Borgia, A., Borgia, M.B., Bugge, K., Kissling, V.M., Heidarsson, P.O., Fernandes, C.B., Sottini, A., Soranno, A., Buholzer, K.J., Nettels, D., et al. (2018). Extreme disorder in an ultrahigh-affinity protein complex. Nature 19, 31. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25762. 99. Shrinivas, K., and Brenner, M.P. (2021). Phase separation in fluids with many interacting components. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 118. e2108551118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2108551118. 100. Li, P., Banjade, S., Cheng, H.C., Kim, S., Chen, B., Guo, L., Llaguno, M., Hollingsworth, J.V., King, D.S., Banani, S.F., et al. (2012). Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins. Nature 483, 336–340. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10879. 101. Choi, J.M., Holehouse, A.S., and Pappu, R.V. (2020). Physical principles underlying the complex biology of intracellular phase transitions. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 49, 107–133. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-biophys121219-081629. 102. Banani, S.F., Rice, A.M., Peeples, W.B., Lin, Y., Jain, S., Parker, R., and Rosen, M.K. (2016). Compositional control of phase-separated cellular bodies. Cell 166, 651–663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.06.010. 103. Cermakova, K., Demeulemeester, J., Lux, V., Nedomova, M., Goldman, S.R., Smith, E.A., Srb, P., Hexnerova, R., Fabry, M., Madlikova, M., et al. (2021). A ubiquitous disordered protein interaction module orchestrates transcription elongation. Science 374, 1113–1121. https://doi.org/10. 1126/science.abe2913. 104. Li, C.H., Coffey, E.L., Dall’Agnese, A., Hannett, N.M., Tang, X., Henninger, J.E., Platt, J.M., Oksuz, O., Zamudio, A.V., Afeyan, L.K., et al. (2020). MeCP2 links heterochromatin condensates and neurodevelopmental disease. Nature 586, 440–444. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586020-2574-4. 105. Shen, L., Shao, N., Liu, X., and Nestler, E. (2014). ngs.plot: Quick mining and visualization of next-generation sequencing data by integrating genomic databases. BMC Genomics 15, 284. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 1471-2164-15-284.

110. Li, H., Handsaker, B., Wysoker, A., Fennell, T., Ruan, J., Homer, N., Marth, G., Abecasis, G., and Durbin, R.; 1000 Genome Project Data Processing Subgroup (2009). The sequence alignment/map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics 25, 2078–2079. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btp352. 111. Langmead, B., Trapnell, C., Pop, M., and Salzberg, S.L. (2009). Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 10, R25. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2009-103-r25. 112. Zhang, Y., Liu, T., Meyer, C.A., Eeckhoute, J., Johnson, D.S., Bernstein, B.E., Nusbaum, C., Myers, R.M., Brown, M., Li, W., and Liu, X.S. (2008). Model-based analysis of ChIP-seq (MACS). Genome Biol. 9, R137. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2008-9-9-r137. 113. Mi, H., Ebert, D., Muruganujan, A., Mills, C., Albou, L.-P., Mushayamaha, T., and Thomas, P.D. (2021). PANTHER version 16: a revised family classification, tree-based classification tool, enhancer regions and extensive API. Nucleic Acids Res. 49, D394–D403. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/ gkaa1106. 114. Necci, M., Piovesan, D., Clementel, D., Dosztányi, Z., and Tosatto, S.C.E. (2020). MobiDB-lite 3.0: fast consensus annotation of intrinsic disorder flavors in proteins. Bioinformatics 36, btaa1045. https://doi.org/10. 1093/bioinformatics/btaa1045. 115. Oates, M.E., Romero, P., Ishida, T., Ghalwash, M., Mizianty, M.J., Xue, B., Dosztányi, Z., Uversky, V.N., Obradovic, Z., Kurgan, L., et al. (2013). D2P2: database of disordered protein predictions. Nucleic Acids Res. 41, D508–D516. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks1226. 116. Emenecker, R.J., Griffith, D., and Holehouse, A.S. (2021). Metapredict: a fast, accurate, and easy-to-use predictor of consensus disorder and structure. Biophys. J. 120, 4312–4319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj. 2021.08.039. 117. Holehouse, A.S., Das, R.K., Ahad, J.N., Richardson, M.O.G., and Pappu, R.V. (2017). CIDER: resources to analyze sequence-ensemble relationships of intrinsically disordered proteins. Biophys. J. 112, 16–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2016.11.3200. 118. Nielsen, R., Pedersen, T.A., Hagenbeek, D., Moulos, P., Siersbaek, R., Megens, E., Denissov, S., Børgesen, M., Francoijs, K.J., Mandrup, S., and Stunnenberg, H.G. (2008). Genome-wide profiling of PPARg:RXR and RNA polymerase II occupancy reveals temporal activation of distinct metabolic pathways and changes in RXR dimer composition during adipogenesis. Genes Dev. 22, 2953–2967. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.501108. 119. Carpenter, A.E., Jones, T.R., Lamprecht, M.R., Clarke, C., Kang, I.H., Friman, O., Guertin, D.A., Chang, J.H., Lindquist, R.A., Moffat, J., et al. (2006). CellProfiler: image analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome Biol. 7, R100. https://doi.org/10.1186/ gb-2006-7-10-r100.

106. Quinlan, A.R., and Hall, I.M. (2010). BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. Bioinformatics 26, 841–842. https:// doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033.

120. Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., et al. (2012). Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2019.

107. Lovén, J., Hoke, H.A., Lin, C.Y., Lau, A., Orlando, D.A., Vakoc, C.R., Bradner, J.E., Lee, T.I., and Young, R.A. (2013). Selective inhibition of tumor oncogenes by disruption of super-enhancers. Cell 153, 320–334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.036.

121. Schmidt, U., Weigert, M., Broaddus, C., and Myers, G. (2018). Cell detection with star-convex polygons. In Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (Springer International Publishing), pp. 265–273. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00934-2_30.

Cell 186, 327–345, January 19, 2023 345

[Page 21]

STAR+METHODS KEY RESOURCES TABLE

REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

Recombinant DNA pET_6His_TEV_mEGFP_MED1IDR

Sabari et al.11

N/A

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mEGFP_ MED1IDR EDtoA

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mEGFP_ MED1IDR RHKtoA

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry

Sabari et al.11

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_CTR9 IDR

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_SPT6 IDR

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_NELFA tentacle

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_HP1a IDR

This paper

cDNA: Addgene 17652

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_FUS IDR

This paper

cDNA: Addgene 26374

pET_6His_TEV_mEGFP_MED1 scramble

IDR

tentacle

This paper

cDNA: gift from D’Orso Lab

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_ NELFE Blocky_tentacle

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_1

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_2

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_3

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_4

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_NELFE

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_5

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_ SPT6IDR-charge_scramble

This paper

N/A

pET_6His_TEV_mCherry_SPT6IDRnon-charge_scramble_3

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-MED1IDR_WT

Zamudio et al.40

N/A

CFP-LacI-MED1 FL

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-MED1 DIDR

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-MED1IDR_EDtoA

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-MED1IDR_RHKtoA

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-MED1IDR-Scramble

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-CTR9IDR

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-SPT6IDR

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-NELFAtentacle

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-HP1a

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-FUSIDR

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-CDK12IDR

This paper

cDNA: Addgene #116723

CFP-LacI-FUSIDR

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-CTR9IDR-charge_scramble

This paper

N/A

CFP-LacI-SPT6IDR-charge_scramble

This paper

N/A

IDR

pCDNA3.1_mCherry

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_CTR9IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_LEO1IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_PAF1IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_CTR9IDR_EDtoA

This paper

N/A (Continued on next page)

e1 Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023

[Page 22]

Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_CTR9

IDR

_KRtoA

IDENTIFIER

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFAtentacle

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_CTR9IDR_scramble

This paper

N/A

mCherry-MS2coatProtein (MCP)

Addgene

# 103832

miRFP670-MS2coatProtein (MCP)

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_CTR9_FL

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_CTR9_DIDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6_FL

This paper

cDNA: gift from Vos Lab

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6_DIDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_HP1aIDR

This paper

N/A

IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFEtentacle

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_p300IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_DDX4IDR

This paper

cDNA: Addgene 101225

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_EWSR1IDR

This paper

cDNA: Addgene 26377

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_IWS1IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_MeCP2IDR

This paper

cDNA: Li et al.104

This paper

cDNA: Addgene 82510

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_FUS

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_CBX2

IDR

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_ NICD

This paper

cDNA: gift from the Rosen Lab

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_ NPM1IDR

This paper

cDNA: Addgene 17578

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_ KDM1AIDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_ RCOR3IDR

This paper

N/A

cDNA: design from Yamazaki et al.75

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDR_EDtoA

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDR_RHKtoA

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDR_Scramble

This paper

N/A

R12_pm9

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_ Ki67

x2

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_MED1IDR

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDRcharge_scramble

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_CTR9IDRcharge_scramble

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDR_ non-charge_scramble_1

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDR_ non-charge_scramble_2

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDR_ non-charge_scramble_3

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_SPT6IDR_ middle_WT(ABABA)

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_ SPT6IDR_middle_AAABB

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_ SPT6IDR_middle_BBAAA

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_ SPT6IDR_middle_BAAAB

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_1

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_2

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_3

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_4

This paper

N/A (Continued on next page)

Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023 e2

[Page 23]

Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_synthetic_IDR_5

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFEtentacle_blocky

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFE-CTR9IDR chimera

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFE-CTR9IDR_ charge_scramble chimera

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFE-SPT6IDR chimera

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFE-SPT6IDR_ charge_scramble chimera

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFE FL (WT tentacle)

This paper

N/A

pCDNA3.1_mCherry_NELFE-blocky tentacle chimera

This paper

N/A

LentiCRISPR V2

Addgene

#52961

psPAX2-GAG-Pol-Rev

Addgene

#12260

pAdVAntage

Promega

E1711

pCMV-VSV-G

Addgene

#8454

pUltra_GFP-P2A

Ito et al.60

pUltra_GFP-P2A_mMed1_FL

Ito et al.60

pUltra_GFP-P2A_mMed1-IDR_EDtoA

This paper

N/A

pUltra_GFP-P2A_mMed1-IDR_RHKtoA

This paper

N/A

pUltra_GFP-P2A_mMed1-IDR_Scramble

This paper

N/A

pUltra_GFP-P2A_mMed1-SPT6IDR chimera

This paper

N/A

pUltra_GFP-P2A_mMed1-SPT6IDR _charge_scramble chimera

This paper

N/A

NELF-B

Abcam

Cat# ab167401; RRID:AB_2721176

MED1

Bethyl

Cat# A303-876A; RRID:AB_2620226

Antibodies for IF

CTR9

Bethyl

Cat# A301-395A; RRID:AB_960973

RNAP II Subunit B1 (Phospho-CTD Ser-5) Clone 3E8

Millipore

Cat# 04-1572; RRID:AB_10615822

RNAP II Subunit B1 (Phospho-CTD Ser-2) Clone 3E10

Millipore

Cat# 04-1571; RRID:AB_10627998

RNA Polymerase II, C-Terminus Domain

Millipore

Cat# 05-952; RRID:AB_492629

H3K27ac

Active Motif

Cat# 39133; RRID:AB_2561016

SPT6

Cell Signaling

Cat# 15616; RRID:AB_2798748

IWS1

Cell Signaling

Cat# 5681; RRID:AB_10694503

HP1alpha

Abcam

Cat# ab109028; RRID:AB_10858495

NPM1

Thermo Fisher

Cat# 32-5200; RRID:AB_2533084

H3K9me3

Active Motif

Cat# 39161; RRID:AB_2532132

Anti-goat IgG-Alexa Fluor 488

Thermo Fisher

Cat# A-11055; RRID:AB_2534102

Anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 555

Thermo Fisher

Cat# A32732; RRID:AB_2633281

Anti-mouse IgG-Alexa Fluor 555

Thermo Fisher

Cat# A48270; RRID:AB_2896336

Anti-rat IgG-Alexa Fluor 555

Thermo Fisher

Cat# A48270; RRID:AB_2896336

Anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 635

Thermo Fisher

Cat# A-31577; RRID:AB_2536187

RNA Polymerase II, C-Terminus Domain

Millipore

Cat# 05-952; RRID:AB_492629

CTR9

Bethyl

Cat# A301-395A; RRID:AB_960973

Antibodies for Western blot

(Continued on next page)

e3 Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023

[Page 24]

Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

SPT6

Cell Signaling

Cat# 15616; RRID:AB_2798748

IWS1

Cell Signaling

Cat# 5681; RRID:AB_10694503

NELF-B

Abcam

Cat# ab167401; RRID:AB_2721176

FUS/TLS (E3O8I)

Cell Signaling

Cat# 67840S

PTBP1 (E5O2S)

Cell Signaling

Cat# 72669; RRID:AB_2799826

GFP (B-2)

Santa Cruz

Cat# sc-9996; RRID:AB_627695

MED1

Bethyl

Cat# A300-793A; RRID:AB_577241

A.v. GFP (JL-8)

Takara

Cat# 632381; RRID:AB_2313808

MED1

Thermo Fisher

Cat# PA5-36200; RRID:AB_2553413

MED4

Abcam

Cat# ab129170; RRID:AB_11145268

Beta Tubulin

Abcam

Cat# ab6046; RRID:AB_2210370

Lamin A

Bethyl

Cat# A303-432A; RRID:AB_10951675

horseradish peroxidase (HRP)conjugated anti-Mouse IgG

Cytiva

Cat# NA931; RRID:AB_772210

horseradish peroxidase (HRP)conjugated anti-Rabbit IgG

Cytiva

Cat# NA934; RRID:AB_772206

Oligonucleotides Primers for qPCR

This paper

See table in methods section

sgRNA for Med1 KO and IDR deletion

This paper

See table in methods section

293T

ATCC

CRL-3216

3T3-L1

ATCC

CL-173

3T3-L1_CRISPR KO and DIDR cells

This paper

3T3-L1_MED1 KO clones #2 and #15

Ito et al.60

U2OS 2-6-3

Janicki et al.57

U2OS

Sabari Lab

Experimental models: Cell lines

siRNA ON-TARGETplus Non-targeting Pool

Horizon Discovery

D-001810-10-05

ON-TARGETplus Mouse Med1 (19014) siRNA - Individual 040964-15

Horizon Discovery

J-040964-15-0005

ON-TARGETplus Mouse Ctr9 (22083) siRNA - Individual 047267-09

Horizon Discovery

J-047267-09-0002

ON-TARGETplus Mouse Iws1 (73473) siRNA - Individual 055676-09

Horizon Discovery

J-055676-09-0002

ON-TARGETplus Mouse Supt6 (20926) siRNA - Individual 62143-09

Horizon Discovery

J-062143-09-0002

ON-TARGETplus Mouse Nelfb (58202) siRNA - Individual 048011-09

Horizon Discovery

J-048011-09-0002

Chemicals and commercial assays DMEM

FisherScientific

11995

FBS

Sigma

F0926

GlutaMAX

FisherScientific

35050

Penicillin-Streptomycin

FisherScientific

15140

cOmplete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail

Sigma

11873580001

Slide-A-Lyzer MINI Dialysis Device

FisherScientific

Qubit Protein Assay Kit

Thermo Fisher

Q33211

Eppendorf LoBind Microcentrifuge Tubes: Protein

Eppendorf

(Continued on next page)

Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023 e4

[Page 25]

Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

S-Trap Micro

Protifi

C02-micro-80

Oasis HLB solid-phase extraction plate

Waters

186001828BA

EasySpray column

Thermo

ES905

3 to 8% Tris-Acetate 1.0 mm polyacrylamide gel

Thermo Fisher

EA03752BOX

Tris-Acetate SDS Running Buffer

FisherScientific

LA0041

Invitrogen Mini Gel Tank and Blot Module set

Thermo Fisher

NW2000

0.45-um PVDF membrane

Millipore

IPVH00010

Novex Tris-Glycine Transfer Buffer

FisherScientific

LC3675

SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescent Substrate

Thermo Fisher

34577

Tet system approved FBS

Takara Bio USA

631105

Coverslips

VWR

48366-067

Paraformaldehyde

VWR

BT140770

triton X100

Sigma

T9284

IgG-free bovine serum albumin, BSA

VWR

102643-516

Hoechst 33342

Thermo Fisher

62249

Slides

VWR

10144-820

Vectashield

VWR

101098-042

nail polish

VWR

100491-940

Lipofectamine 3000 transfection reagent

FisherScientific

L3000015

poly-L-lysine

Sigma

P4832

IBMX

Sigma

I7018

Dexamethasone

Sigma

D1881

Insulin

Sigma

I5500

Troglitazone

Sigma

T2573

Lipofectamine RNAiMAX transfection reagent

FisherScientific

13-778-075

Polybrene Infection/Transfection Reagent

Sigma

TR-1003

Puromycin

FisherScientific

A11138

IGEPAL CA-630

Sigma

I8896

DynaBeads Protein G

Invitrogen

10004D

RNeasy Plus Mini Kit

Qiagen

74136

High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit

Applied Biosystems

4368814

PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix

Applied Biosystems

A25778

BODIPY 493/503

Thermo Fisher

D3922

Hoechst 33342 Solution

Thermo Fisher

62249

NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix

NEB

E2621L

Isopropyl ß-D-1thiogalactopyranoside, IPTG

Sigma

70527

HisPur Ni-NTA resin

FisherScientific

PI88222

Poly-Prep Chromatography Columns

Bio-Rad

7311550

ENrich SEC 650 10 x 300 column

Bio-Rad

7801650

UNO S6 column

Bio-Rad

5-alpha Competent E. coli

NEB

C2987H

NiCo21(DE3) Competent E. coli

NEB

C2529H

Bacterial and virus strains

(Continued on next page)

e5 Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023

[Page 26]

Continued REAGENT or RESOURCE

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

Proteome Discoverer v2.4

Thermo

Version 2.4

GraphPad Prism 9

GraphPad Software, LLC.

Version 9.3.1 https://www.graphpad.com/

CellProfiler

CellProfiler

Version 4.1.3 https://cellprofiler.org/

aImageJ (FIJI)

Open Source

Version 2.3.0/1.53f https://imagej.net/software/fiji/

Nikon Elements

Nikon instruments

https://www.microscope.healthcare. nikon.com/products/software

Ngsplot

Shen et al.105

Version 2.63/ https://github.com/ shenlab-sinai/ngsplot

SRA tool kit

NCBI

Version 2.8.2/ https://github.com/ncbi/ sra-tools

Bedtools

Quinlan and Hall106

Version 2.29.2/ http://bedtools. readthedocs.io/en/latest/

ROSE Package

Whyte et al.,53 Lovén et al.107

http://younglab.wi.mit.edu/ super_enhancer_code.html

STAR aligner

Dobin et al.108

Version 2.7.3/ https://github.com/ alexdobin/STAR

DEseq2

Love et al.109

https://bioconductor.org/packages/ release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html

Samtools

Li et al.110

Version 1.6/ http://samtools. sourceforge.net

Bowtie

Langmead et al.111

Version 1.0.0/ http://bowtie.cbcb.umd.edu.

Macs

Zhang et al.112

Version 14.2

Panther

Mi et al.113

Version 17.0/ http://pantherdb.org/

MobiDB lite

Necci et al.114

Version 3.9.0/ http://old.protein.bio.unipd. it/mobidblite/

D2P2

Oates et al.115

Metapredict

Emenecker et al.116

Version 1.31/ https://github.com/idptools/ metapredict

localCIDER

Holehouse et al.117

Version 0.1.17/ http://pappulab.github.io/ localCIDER/

Raw proteomics data

This study

MassIVE: MSV000089301

RNA sequence data and processed files

This study

GEO: GSE210875

Software and algorithms

Deposited data

GEO accession numbers of previously published data used in this study MED1 and RNA Pol II ChIP-seq (mESC)

Sabari et al.11

GEO: GSE112806

SPT6 ChIP-seq (mESC)

Wang et al.51

GEO: GSE103180

CTR9, NELFA, Pol2Ser2P and Pol2Ser5P ChIP-seq (mESC)

Ding et al.52

GEO: GSE149999

GRO-seq data (mESC)

Min et al.56

GEO: GSE27037

RNA Pol II ChIP-seq (3T3-L1)

Nielsen et al.118

GEO: GSE13511

MED1 ChIP-seq (3T3-L1 cells)

Siersbæk et al.61

GEO: GSE95533

RNA-seq (3T3L1 cells)

Siersbæk et al.61

GEO: GSE95533

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY Lead contact Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact Benjamin R. Sabari (benjamin.sabari@utsouthwestern.edu).

Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023 e6

[Page 27]

Materials availability All plasmids generated in this study are available upon request. Data and code availability d The RNA sequence data and processed files are available at GEO: GSE210875. The raw proteomics data are available at MassIVE: MSV000089301. Microscopy data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request. d Code is available from lead contact upon request. d Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request. EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS U2OS cells Cells were cultured as previously described.57 Briefly, U2OS 2-6-3 cells (Lac array cells) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% Tet system approved FBS (Takara Bio USA 631105), 1% Penicillin Streptomycin (Fisher 15-140-122), 1% GlutaMAX Supplement (Fisher Scientific 35050061). Cells were grown at 37 C with 5% CO2 in a humidified sterile incubator. For U2OS cells without the Lac array system (used in Figure 1), cells were grown in regular FBS (Sigma F0926). 3T3-L1 and 293T cells 3T3-L1 cells (ATCC CL-173) were cultured in full medium (DMEM (FisherScientific 11995) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma F0926), 1x GlutaMAX (FisherScientific 35050), 1x Penicillin-Streptomycin (FisherScientific 15140). 293T cells were grown in full medium on plates coated with 0.001% poly-L-lysine (Sigma P4832). 3T3-L1 differentiation Cells were grown to 100% confluence and then maintained for two days prior to initiating differentiation. Differentiation was induced by treatment with full medium supplemented with 0.5mM IBMX (Sigma I7018), 1mM dexamethasone (Sigma D1881), 5mg/ml insulin (Sigma I5500), 5mM troglitazone (Sigma T2573). Cells were treated with this differentiation medium for three days before being switched to full medium containing 5mg/ml insulin. METHOD DETAILS Nuclear extract preparation 1-2 x 108 U2OS cells were grown in DMEM (Fisher Scientific 11995073) supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher 15140122) and GlutaMAX (Fisher Scientific 35050061) at 37 C under 5% CO2. Cells were collected by trypsinization, pelleted at 500xg, and resuspended in 10 mL of buffer CE+NP40 (cytoplasmic extract) (20 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)). After 5 min incubation on ice, the sample was centrifuged at 500xg, 4 C. Pellet was washed three times in 4 mL of buffer CE (20 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)) and resuspended in 1 mL of buffer NE (nuclear extract) (20 mM Tris-HCl, 420 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 25% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)). This sample was rotated at 4 C for 1 hour and clarified by centrifugation at 20,000xg. Clarified lysate was dialyzed in dialysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 75 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)) using Slide-A-Lyzer MINI Dialysis Device (Fisher Scientific 88404). Extracts were clarified and protein concentration was measured by Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Q33211). Protein expression and purification The DNA fragments encoding the protein region of interest were cloned into a modified T7 pET expression vector, resulting in the protein having N terminal 6xHis mEGFP or mCherry (see Key Resource Table and Table S1) followed by a 14 amino acid linker sequence ‘‘GAPGSAGSAAGGSG’’ before the protein region of interest. NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly Master Mix (NEB E2621L) was used to insert the DNA sequence in-frame with the linker sequence. The generated construct was transformed into NEB 5-alpha Competent E. coli (C2987H) and plasmids were isolated from a selected bacterial colony. Sequence identity was confirmed using sanger sequencing. NiCo21(DE3) Competent E. coli cells (NEB C2529H) were transformed with the bacterial expression plasmids described above. Transformed colonies were grown in LB media at 37 C on a rotating shaker (250 rpm) until OD600 of 0.6 was reached. Following 1mM of Isopropyl ß-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG, Sigma 70527) induction for protein expression, the bacterial culture was incubated at room temperature for 16 hours. For Synthetic_IDR_1 and NELFEtentacle_blocky protein production cells were incubated at 21 C at 135 rpm for 20 hours after induction. For SPT6IDR_non-charge_scramble protein production, cells were grown in LB media at 37 C at 250 rpm until OD600 of 0.6 reached and further incubated at 21 C at 135 rpm for 20 hours without induction. All bacterial

e7 Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023

[Page 28]

pellets were collected by spinning the culture at 14000 rpm at 4 C for 30 minutes in a Sorvall Rc6+ centrifuge. The pellet was lysed and dissolved using 30 mL of lysis buffer (50mM Tris, 500mM NaCl, 5mM b-mercaptoethanol) supplemented with cOmplete EDTA free 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001). Dissolved pellets were subjected to sonication on ice using a Branson Digital Sonifier 250 at 50% amplitude with 5 second bursts followed by 10 second cooling period until homogenous lysate was obtained. The lysate was centrifuged at 18000 rpm at 4 C for 30 minutes. During the lysate centrifugation step, HisPur Ni-NTA resin (FisherScientific PI88222) was equilibrated with lysis buffer. The supernatant from the bacterial lysate was collected and incubated with the equilibrated resin for 1 hour at 4 C, after which the mixture was poured into empty polypropylene columns (Bio-Rad 7311550). Wash buffer (50mM Tris, 2.5 M NaCl, 5mM BME, 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)) was applied to the column prior to elution with elution buffer (50 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, 5 mM BME, 500 mM imidazole, and 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail). mEGFP-MED1IDR eluted from Ni-NTA column was dialyzed (50mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 1mM PMSF) and purified by cation exchange chromatography on UNO S6 column (Bio-Rad 7200023) using Buffer A (50 mM Tris, 5 mM BME) and Buffer B (50 mM Tris, 5 mM BME, 1M NaCl). Fractions (0.5 mL each) containing purified protein were collected. For all other proteins mentioned in the manuscript, size exclusion chromatography was performed by FPLC (Bio-Rad NGC quest) with an ENrich SEC 650 10 x 300 column (Bio-Rad 7801650) in buffer containing 50 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl and 5mM BME. Next, all proteins were dialyzed against protein storage buffer (50 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT) overnight at 4 C. The concentration of dialyzed protein was calculated by reading A280 on a spectrophotometer (DeNovix, DS-11 FX+). The purified proteins were either used immediately or stored at -80 C. DNA synthesis of IDR cDNA Custom DNA fragments for natural, mutated, or artificial IDR sequences were ordered from Twist Bioscience as gene fragments without adapter sequences. Gene fragments were directly inserted using HiFi (NEB) into either bacterial expression vectors for protein purification or mammalian expression vectors for cell-based experiments. All synthetic DNA were sequence verified by sanger sequencing. See Table S1 for the amino acid sequences of all IDRs used in this study. Pelleting assay Purified recombinant mEGFP-MED1IDR and U2OS nuclear extract were pre-clarified at 22,000 x g for at least 30 minutes to remove any insoluble material. Purified recombinant mEGFP-MED1IDR (final 15mM) and nuclear extract (final 0.6 mg/mL) were mixed in Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf 22431081) and incubated for 15 minutes. The mixture was then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 10 minutes in fixed angle rotor. The supernatant fraction was carefully removed leaving behind the pellet fraction. Both the pellet and supernatant fractions were brought to equal volume and resuspended in either 1x Laemmli sample buffer (58mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 5% glycerol, 1.6% SDS, 3.3% beta-mercaptoethanol, 0.007% bromophenol blue) for western blot analysis or in a resuspension buffer for downstream proteomic analysis. Proteomics Two independent pelleting assays were performed as described above. Pellets and supernatants were brought up to equal volumes in a resuspension buffer (25mM Tris, 500mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1mM DTT). Samples were dried in a SpeedVac to reduce the volume to 10-20 uL, after which an equal volume of 10% SDS with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added to each. Reduction and alkylation were performed with tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and iodoacetamide. Next, trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37 C on an S-Trap Micro (Protifi) following the manufacturer’s directions. After digestion, the peptide eluate was cleaned using an Oasis HLB solid-phase extraction plate (Waters), dried in a SpeedVac, and reconstituted in a 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA buffer. The resulting samples were injected onto an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC-Nano liquid chromatography system. Samples were injected onto a 75 um i.d., 75-cm long EasySpray column (Thermo) and eluted with a gradient from 0-28% Buffer B over 90 min at 250 nL/min. Buffer A contained 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water, and Buffer B contained 80% (v/v) ACN, 10% (v/v) trifluoroethanol, and 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode with a source voltage of 1.5 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 C. MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and up to 10 MS/MS spectra were obtained in the ion trap for each full spectrum acquired using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for ions with charges 2-7. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25s after an ion was selected for fragmentation. Raw MS data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo), with peptide identification performed using Sequest HT searching against the human protein database from UniProt along with the sequence for mEGFP-MED1IDR. Fragment and precursor tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da were specified, and three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, with oxidation of Met set as a variable modification. The false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was 1% for all peptides. Proteomic data analysis We used the Mass spectrometry data for MED1IDR fractions to calculate the fold enrichment between the pellet fraction(P) and the supernatant fraction(S) (n=2). Average pellet to supernatant fraction (P/S) values were used to determine the top 40 pellet-enriched proteins. Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed for highly enriched pellet fraction proteins using PANTHER

Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023 e8

[Page 29]

Overrepresentation Test (v16.0) with slim molecular function categories and Fisher’s exact test. The list of all proteins identified from the nuclear extract was used as background. Data for the protein composition of NPM1 induced cell lysate granules were obtained from a published work45 and a list of the top 200 highly enriched proteins was created based on the NPM1 enrichment score mentioned in this dataset. Using the UniProt IDs, we compared the overlap between the MED1 and NPM1 pellet enriched proteins. Western blot Samples were run on a 3% to 8% Tris-Acetate 1.0 mm polyacrylamide gel (Thermo Fisher EA03752BOX) using Tris-Acetate SDS Running Buffer (Fisher Scientific LA0041), in an Invitrogen Mini Gel Tank and Blot Module set (Thermo Fisher NW2000) at 150V for 75 min. Protein was wet transferred to a 0.45-um PVDF membrane (Millipore IPVH00010) in cold 10% Methanol Novex TrisGlycine Transfer Buffer (Fisher Scientific LC3675) at 200 mA for 105 min at room temperature. After transfer, the membrane was blocked with 5% non-fat milk in TBST for 1 h at room temperature (RT), then incubated in primary antibody in 5% non-fat milk in TBST overnight at 4 C. After three subsequent washes in TBST at room temperature, the membrane was incubated with 1:10,000 horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-Mouse IgG (Cytiva NA931V) or anti-Rabbit IgG (Cytiva NA934V) secondary antibody diluted in 5% non-fat-milk in TBST for 1h at RT. After washing with TBST, the membrane was developed with chemiluminescent HRP substrate (Thermo Fisher 34577) and imaged using Chemidoc MP system from Bio-Rad. Microscopy All micrographs shown in figures are representative for each experimental sample. These images were acquired using a Hamamatsu ORCA-Fusion C14440 digital camera and a CSU-W1 Yokogawa Spinning Disk Field Scanning Confocal System equipped with a Super Resolution by Optical Pixel Reassignment (SoRa) module. Data in Figure 1 were acquired using a 60x Plan Apo Lambda Oil Immersion objective (NA, 1.40) with SoRa engaged. Unless otherwise noted, all other images were acquired with the same objective without SoRa. Thickness of Z-slices were 0.15mm (SoRa) or 0.2 mm otherwise. SoRa images were processed using Nikon Instruments 3D deconvolution. Images of BODIPY stained 3T3-L1 cells were acquired using a 20x Plan Apo Lambda objective (NA, 0.75) and a Z stack step size of 5.6mm. Exposure time and laser intensity were the same for samples imaged in parallel. Laser lines used: 405nm, 488 nm, 561 nm, and 640 nm. Immunofluorescence Immunofluorescence was performed as formerly described11 with certain modifications. In brief, cells were grown on coverslips (VWR 48366-067) in a 6-well plate and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (VWR BT140770) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature (RT). After three washes in PBS for 10 min, samples were permeabilized with 0.5% triton X100 (Sigma T9284) in PBS for 10 min at RT. After washing three times in PBS for 5 min, cells were blocked with 4% IgG-free bovine serum albumin, BSA, (VWR 102643-516) for 1 hour at RT and incubated overnight at RT with primary antibodies in 4% IgG-free BSA (samples were kept in the dark if they contained transfected fluorophores). Following three washes in PBS for 10 min each, samples were incubated with secondary antibodies for 2h in the dark. For co-immunofluorescence, cells were incubated with secondary antibodies, one species at a time, to avoid cross-reactivity (donkey against goat followed by PBS washing and then an incubation with goat against rabbit or mouse). Next, cells were incubated with 1:5000 Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher 62249) in double-distilled water at RT in the dark (5 min). After washing once more with water, coverslips were mounted on slides (VWR 10144-820) with Vectashield (VWR 101098042). Coverslips were sealed with nail polish (VWR 100491-940) and stored at 4 C in the dark. All primary antibodies for immunofluorescence were diluted 1:500. All secondary antibodies were diluted 1:10,000. Manders coefficients were calculated using CellProfiler.119 The analysis pipeline included image segmentation to identify individual cells based on Hoechst staining in a 60X magnification image. The channels for immunofluorescence (MED1 and other proteins of interest) were analyzed per identified nuclei and a Manders coefficient was calculated per cell considering MED1 as the channel of reference. Thresholding was performed for the highest range of fluorescence using FIJI as a reference and then CellProfiler’s Robust background thresholding. A single Z-slice per image sample was used (focused on best plane). Analysis of mESC sequencing data ChIP-seq and GRO-seq alignment and processing ChIP-seq and GRO-seq data collected from mESCs were downloaded using SRA tool kit (v2.8.2) from the following GEO datasets: GSE112806 (RNA Polymerase II and MED1 ChIP-seq and Input), GSE103180 (SPT6 ChIP-seq), GSE149999 (CTR9, NELFA, S2ph, and S5Ph ChIP-seq) and GSE27037 (GRO-seq). The sequenced reads (FASTQ) were aligned to the mm10 version of the mouse reference genome using bowtie (v1.0.0) with parameters –k 1 –m 1 –best and –strata. The aligned reads were processed using samtools (v1.6) to convert into its binary counterpart (.bam) as well as to sort and remove potential PCR duplicates. Processed bam files were converted to BED files and sorted using BEDtools (v 2.29.2). Ranking of MED1 enhancer genes and LOESS fit The list of enhancers and their nearest Refseq gene IDs in mESCs were obtained from a previously published dataset.53 The list was sorted based on the MED1 signal and the chromosomal positions were added to the mm10 version of the genome. The average

e9 Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023

[Page 30]

profile plots for all typical enhancer genes and super-enhancer genes (annotated in original dataset as super-enhancer YES/NO) were generated using ngsplot (v2.63) with parameters -G mm10 -R gene body -GO none. RPKM values were calculated for MED1 sorted enhancer genes for the gene body region (TSS-TES) from different ChIP samples and the LOESS polynomial regression fit for RPKM values was plotted against MED1 sorted and ranked enhancer regions using custom R scripts. Predicted fit values were normalized by the minimum predicted value before plotting. RNA polymerase II travel ratio calculation RNA Pol II travel ratio was calculated as previously55 by comparing the ratio between Pol II density in the promoter region and in the gene region. The promoter region is defined from -30 to +300 relative to the TSS, and the gene body as the TSS-TES region. The ratio was calculated from RPKM values for RNA Pol II ChIP-seq data at the promoter and gene body regions. LOESS polynomial regression fit curve was plotted for ratio values against MED1 sorted and ranked enhancer regions (defined in previous method section) using custom R scripts. Predicted fit values were normalized by the first predicted value (lowest MED1 rank ratio fit value) before plotting. Lac array cell methods Culture Cells were cultured as previously described.57 Briefly, U2OS 2-6-3 cells (Lac array cells) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% Tet system approved FBS (Takara Bio USA 631105), 1% Penicillin Streptomycin (Fisher 15-140-122), 1% GlutaMAX Supplement (Fisher Scientific 35050061). Cells were grown at 37 C with 5% CO2 in a humidified sterile incubator. For U2OS cells without the Lac array system (used in Figure 1), cells were grown in regular FBS (Sigma F0926). Transfections Lac array cells were seeded in 6-well plates at 50% confluency and transfected on the same day using Lipofectamine 3000 Transfection Reagent (ThermoFisher L3000015). All transfections for CFP-LacI containing plasmids (see Key Resource Table) were performed at approximately equimolar concentrations following manufacturer’s guidelines (z3000 ng). mCherry-containing plasmids were co-transfected at a lower concentration to avoid non-specific interactions (z2000 ng). For transfections with three plasmids (NELFE chimera experiments), the CFP and mCherry plasmids were used at the concentrations described above. The miRFP670-MS2coatProtein plasmid was co-transfected at a concentration of 2000 ng. Media was changed in the morning after transfection and cells were allowed to recover and then fixed the next day. Imaging was performed 1-2 days after fixing cells. Processing coverslips of co-transfected cells After cells were transfected and allowed to recover, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (VWR BT140770) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark (plate wrapped with foil). After three washes in PBS for 10 min, samples were permeabilized with 0.5% triton X100 (Sigma T9284) in PBS for 10 min at RT. Then cells were incubated with 1:5000 Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher, 62249) in double-distilled water at RT in the dark (5 min). After washing once more with water, coverslips were mounted on slides (VWR 10144-820) with Vectashield (VWR 101098-042). Coverslips were sealed with nail polish (VWR 100491-940) and stored at 4 C. Two-dimensional analysis for IF at CFP foci The relative fraction of IF intensity described in Figures 2 and S2 was performed considering the integrated background fluorescence in the cytoplasm and the integrated fluorescence at the LacO locus core (highest fluorescence intensity range on the Z-slice) using FIJI 2D measurement tools and ROI tools. The same ROI area was used to measure the fluorescence at both background and CFP foci. For this analysis, only high intensity CFP foci were considered given the results in Figures 2F and 2G. These ‘‘high intensity’’ foci were on a different histogram distribution as shown by the Brightness/Contrast tool in FIJI. The quotient used in this analysis (arbitrary units) was calculated as raw intensity at CFP foci divided by raw intensity at background (cytoplasm) using the color channel for the IF of interest. Despite this internal control, it must be noted that images were processed together using the same IF treatment, exposure time, and laser intensity. Three-dimensional analysis for IF at CFP foci The ‘‘3D Objects Counter’’ analysis tool in FIJI was used to quantify the integrated fluorescence intensity of CFP foci and IF signal at the LacO locus. Using the ROI manager, the CFP region was defined after automatically resetting the min and max intensity of the CFP channel using the Brightness/Contrast tool and defining this region at the brightest Z-slice. Next, this region was duplicated across channels and Z-slices containing CFP signal. Then the channels were split using the Channels Tool, and for every channel of interest (IF or CFP) a threshold was set based on a mid-range value observed in control and MED1IDR conditions. Based on this threshold value, the 3D Objects Counter tool can then determine 3D objects and provide their volume and integrated intensity (arbitrary units). For each channel, the integrated intensity data for the largest object was recorded and plotted on the XY graph shown in Figures 2F and 2G. Control and experimental images were processed together using the same IF treatment, exposure time, and laser intensity. Calculation of goodness of fit Data from the three-dimensional analysis of IF for CTR9 and RPB1 shown in Figure 2 was plotted on an XY sheet in Prism. These data were analyzed using a "Logistic growth" model in Prism. This analysis provided the goodness of fit parameter R2. The growth curves shown in Figure 2 represent the early phase of this logistic growth model. The carrying capacity of this model is not shown as saturation of this system was not fully achieved.

Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023 e10

[Page 31]

Partition coefficient calculation for mCherry-IDR in Lac array cells The partition coefficient was calculated by measuring the mCherry integrated fluorescence at the LacO locus core (highest intensity range on the Z-slice) and at a proximal spot in the nucleus (background) using FIJI 2D measurement tools and ROI tools. The same ROI area was used to measure the fluorescence at both background and CFP foci. For this analysis, all CFP foci were equally considered. The quotient of these values (arbitrary units) was calculated as raw intensity at CFP locus divided by raw intensity in the surrounding background. Despite this internal control, it must be noted that images were processed together using the same treatment, exposure time, and laser intensity as their mCherry no IDR control or CFP-LacI no fusion control. MCP analysis Intensity line profiles of mCherry-MCP or miRFP670-MCP on a line across the CFP focus were drawn using FIJI and saved in the ROI manager for use in all samples (z 3 microns). The values outside the CFP foci were taken as reference to normalize the rest of the data by averaging the first and last 4 data points and using a quotient between the rest of the data points and this average. Control and experiment cells containing low and comparable levels of mCherry- or miRFP670-MCP were considered for analysis. The 5 data points in the center of this line profile were averaged per cell and considered for statistical analysis against a control group. Z score calculation Z scores were calculated using the STANDARDIZE function on Microsoft Excel. The formula was given individual partition coefficient values, and the mean and standard deviation of the mCherry no IDR distribution. This normalization score was used for CFP-LacI MED1IDR mutants because their mCherry no IDR baseline partition level was different, so partition coefficients for other mCherry fusions across samples were not directly comparable. Analysis of 3T3-L1 sequencing data Alignment and processing Publicly available MED1 (GSE95533) and RNA polymerase II (GSE13511) ChIP-seq data from 3T3-L1 at different stages of differentiation were used in this study. Reads were aligned to the mm10 genome assembly using bowtie (v1.0.0) with parameters –k 1 –m 1 –best and –strata. Subsequent analyses were performed using a combination of samtools (v1.6) and BEDtools (v 2.29.2). Peak calling was done with MACS (v1.4.2). Counts Per Million normalized bigwig files were displayed on the UCSC genome browser for the visualization of ChIP-seq tracks. Mapping MED1 enhancers and analysis Enhancers and super-enhancers were mapped using the ROSE software package available at younglab.wi.mit.edu/ super_enhancer_code.html for individual macs peak file by considering their respective bam files. Enhancers are defined as stitched regions of MED1 ChIP-seq binding not contained in promoters (t=2000). The stitched enhancer regions were annotated by considering the distance from the center of the enhancer to nearby TSS for genes with FPKM > 10. RPM values were calculated for enhancer regions of respective days of differentiation and the list was sorted based on increasing MED1 RPM signal. RPM values were plotted against ranked MED1 enhancer regions in Figures 3A and 3B. Super-enhancer regions defined by the ROSE algorithm were annotated with the previous strategy for D0 (416 SE) and D2 (785 SE) ChIP-seq samples. These regions were combined and calculated a log2 fold change values (using RPM values) in comparison to Day 0 sample. These regions were sorted and ranked based on their log2FC values (lower to higher), and a bar plot was created with colors representing the loss and gain of super-enhancers (log2FC>=1.5 for gain and log2FC =<1.5 for loss). 3T3-L1 RNA-seq data analysis Published datasets from GEO (MED1: GSE95533) were downloaded for RNA sequencing data for 3T3-L1 cells at different time points of adipocyte differentiation. mRNA-seq reads were mapped to the genome using STAR(v2.7.3a) and subsequent analyses were performed using samtools (v1.6) and BEDtools (v 2.29.2). Counts Per Million normalized bigwig files were displayed in the UCSC genome browser. Read count quantification for genes was performed with htseq-count (v0.6.1) with parameters -i gene_id –stranded = reverse -f bam -m intersection-strict and a GTF file containing transcript positions was downloaded for the mm10 version of the genome from UCSC. Differential analysis was performed using DESeq2109 for RNA samples from different days of adipocyte differentiation in comparison to Day 0 replicates using the standard workflow and both replicates of each condition. Heatmaps and boxplots were plotted for selected candidate genes using Log2FC values in comparison to Day 0 RNA sequencing data. 3T3-L1 model Differentiation 3T3-L1 cells (ATCC CL-173) were cultured in full medium (DMEM (FisherScientific 11995) supplemented with 10% FBS (Sigma F0926), 1x GlutaMAX (FisherScientific 35050), 1x Penicillin-Streptomycin (FisherScientific 15140). Cells were grown to 100% confluence and then maintained for two days prior to initiating differentiation. Differentiation was induced by treatment with full medium supplemented with 0.5mM IBMX (Sigma I7018), 1mM dexamethasone (Sigma D1881), 5mg/ml insulin (Sigma I5500), 5mM troglitazone (Sigma T2573). Cells were treated with this differentiation medium for three days before being switched to full medium containing 5mg/ml insulin.

e11 Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023

[Page 32]

siRNA knockdowns 6 wells of 3T3-L1 cells at approximately 60% confluency were transfected with 30pmol of the indicated Dharmacon siRNAs using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX transfection reagent (FisherScientific 13-778-075) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 48h post transfection, cells were treated with differentiation medium as described above for three days prior to harvesting for RT-qPCR analysis. CRISPR/Cas9 Med1 knockout and Med1DIDR in 3T3-L1 cells 6 wells of 293T cells (ATTC CRL-3216) grown in full medium on plates coated with 0.001% poly-L-lysine (Sigma P4832) at approximately 50% confluency were transfected with 3.3mg LentiCRISPR V2 (Addgene plasmid #52961) containing an sgRNA targeting exon 2, exon 3, or exon 17 of Med1, together with 2mg psPAX2-GAG-Pol-Rev (Addgene plasmid #12260), 0.85mg pAdVAntage (Promega E1711), and 1.3mg pCMV-VSV-G (Addgene plasmid #8454) using Lipofectamine 3000 transfection reagent (FisherScientific L3000015) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A LentiCRISPR V2 plasmid containing a non-targeting sgRNA was transfected as a control. See table below for sgRNA sequences. At 48- and 72-hours post-transfection, culture medium containing virus was collected and passed through a 45mm PVDF filter onto 6 wells of 3T3-L1 cells at approximately 50% confluency. 50mg Polybrene (Sigma TR-1003) was added per well following each addition of virus. 48h after the second addition of virus, infected 3T3-L1 cells were selected using 2mg/ml puromycin (FisherScientific A11138), expanded, and frozen for future use. Med1 knockout and Med1DIDR cell lines were validated by probing cell extracts for MED1 protein expression using an antibody (Invitrogen, PA536200) that binds to an epitope located in the N-terminal domain of MED1. List of sgRNA. Related to STAR Methods sgRNA

Sequence

Med1_exon2_sgRNA1

AATTTAACCAGAACAGACCT

Med1_exon2_sgRNA2

TTGCATGGAGCCGTTCCAGG

Med1_exon3_sgRNA1

GGGTCGTAATGAGTTCTGGA

Med1_exon17_sgRNA1

TTTGGGTGCTGCAGATCTGA

Med1_exon17_sgRNA2

ATCTGATGGAGCACCACAGT

Med1_exon17_sgRNA3

AAGGACTCTGACTCCCACTG

Mouse_Non-Targeting_sgRNA1

GCGAGGTATTCGGCTCCGCG

MED1 Co-IP 40 million cells per line were resuspended in 3.5mL cold lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma I8896), cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma 11873580001)). Samples were sonicated at 20% amplitude for five pulses of 5seconds on, 30seconds off using a Branson Digital Sonifier 250, and subsequently clarified via centrifugation for 15minutes at 16,000xg and 4 C. Protein concentrations of the cleared lysates were measured using Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Invitrogen Q33211) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. 50uL Protein G DynaBeads (Invitrogen 10004D) were washed three times with 0.5% BSA (w/v) and twice with PBS before being resuspended in 40uL cold lysis buffer. The beads were then incubated with 5ug of MED1 antibody (Invitrogen, PA5-36200) at 4 C rotating for 4hours. After washing three times in cold lysis buffer, antibody conjugated beads were incubated with cleared lysate (3,000ug protein) overnight at 4 C. Beads were washed three times with cold lysis buffer, resuspended in 60uL 2x Laemmli buffer, and boiled for 10minutes to release bound proteins. Samples were probed with an antibody that recognizes the N-terminus of MED1 (Invitrogen, PA5-36200) and an antibody that recognizes Med4 (Abcam, ab129170). RT-qPCR 3T3-L1 cell lines were seeded in 6 wells and differentiated as described above. Samples were taken at the indicated timepoints, and RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen 74136) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was generated using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems 4368814), according to the manufacturer’s protocol, without RNase inhibitors. qPCR reactions were setup and standard cycling mode (primer Tm R60 C) and melt curve settings were used as described in the PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems A25778) user guide. Amplification cycles and melt curve analyses were carried out using a Roche LightCycler 480 384-well qPCR system. For each cell line, target gene expression was normalized to the expression of GAPDH. These values were further normalized to the non-targeting control. The sequences of primers used for qPCR are listed below. List of primers used for RT-qPCR, related to STAR Methods RT-qPCR

Forward primer

Reverse primer

Gapdh

TGGTGAAGGTCGGTGTGAAC

CCATGTAGTTGAGGTCAATGAAGG

Fabp4

GCTGGTGGTGGAATGTGTTATG

ATTTCCATCCAGGCCTCTTCC (Continued on next page)

Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023 e12

[Page 33]

Continued RT-qPCR

Forward primer

Reverse primer

Cidec

GCCACGCGGTATTGCC

GATTGTGTTGGACCTCCCCCT

Acsl1

CTCCTTAAATAGCATCGCAACCC

TTCTCTATGCAGAATTCTCCTCC

Cebpa

AATGGCAGTGTGCACGTCTA

CCCCAGCCGTTAGTGAAGAG

Adipoq

TGACGACACCAAAAGGGCTC

ACGTCATCTTCGGCATGACT

Cebpb

AAGCTGAGCGACGAGTACAAGA

GTCAGCTCCAGCACCTTGTG

Vdr

GCATCCAAAAGGTCATCGGC

TCAGAGGTGAGGTCCCTGAA

Med1

TGAAAAAGAACCTGCCCCCG

CCACTCATTGGGTTGTTGCC

Ctr9

CCGGATGCCTGGTCTTTGAT

TTTTCTCGGTCTCGGGTTGG

Spt6

AGAGACGCCAGAGACCTTCT

TCATTTCGGATGGCCTGGTC

Iws1

GAGTCATCCAGGTTTCAGGCA

ATTGCCCTCGATGCTGATTTTC

Nelfb

ATGGCGAGGACCTGAAAGAG

GCCATTCTCTGTCTGAAATTGTTC

BODIPY staining 3T3-L1 cell lines were seeded in 6-well plates and differentiated as described above. At the indicated timepoints, cells were prepared for microscopy and imaged on plates. Briefly, cells were washed with PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature. All subsequent steps were carried out at 37 C. Following fixation, cells were washed with PBS three times for 5minutes each. Cells were permeabilized with 0.5% Triton-X-100 (Sigma T9284) for 10 minutes and then washed three times as before. Next, cells were stained with 3.8mM BODIPY 493/503 (Thermo Fisher D3922) for 30 minutes and then washed three times. Finally, cells were counterstained with 600nM DAPI for 10 minutes, washed with PBS, and left in PBS for the duration of imaging. Images presented in figures are false colored with Red LUT. BODIPY image analysis BODIPY images were processed and analyzed using FIJI.120 Max intensity projections were generated from Z-stacks, and subsequently split into constituent channels. A Gaussian Blur filter with a radius of 4.00 was applied to the DAPI channel prior to using the StarDist Plugin121 to identify and count nuclei. The StarDist 2D feature was implemented using the ‘‘versatile (fluorescent nuclei)’’ neural network prediction model and the option to ‘‘set optimized post-processing thresholds (for selected model).’’ The Cell Counter Plugin (Kurt De Vos, University of Sheffield, Academic Neurology) was used to manually count cells that contained BODIPY-stained fat droplets. The number of BODIPY-stained cells was divided by the number of nuclei within the field of view, with the quotient multiplied by 100 to obtain the percentage of differentiating cells. RNA-seq library construction protocol Samples were run on the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer to determine level of degradation thus ensuring only high-quality RNA is used (RIN Score 8 or higher). The Qubit fluorometer is used to determine the concentration prior to staring library prep. 4 mg of total DNAse treated RNA are then prepared with the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA LT Sample Prep Kit from Illumina. Poly-A RNA is purified and fragmented before strand specific cDNA synthesis. cDNA are then a-tailed and indexed adapters are ligated. After adapter ligation, samples are PCR amplified and purified with Ampure XP beads, then validated again on the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. Samples are quantified by Qubit before being normalized and pooled, then run on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 using SBS v3 reagents 3T3-L1 RNA-seq data analysis for CRISPR lines and siRNA knockdowns Fifteen 3T3-L1 samples were analyzed by mRNA-seq. One sample of undifferentiated parental 3T3-L1 cells (WT_undiff). One sample of 3-day differentiated parental 3T3-L1 cells (WT_diff). Thirteen samples of 3-day differentiated 3T3-L1 cells with various genetic perturbations: three independent CRISPR Med1 KO cell lines (Med1_KO_1-3), three independent CRISPR Med1 DIDR cell lines (Med1_ DIDR_1-3), CRISPR non-targeting control cell line (NT), Med1 siRNA knockdown, Ctr9 siRNA knockdown, Spt6 siRNA knockdown, Iws1 siRNA knockdown, Nelfb siRNA knockdown, and control siRNA. Raw and processed data are available on GEO (GSE210875). The quality of the Fastq files obtained for RNA seq samples were confirmed and Demultiplexed mRNA seq reads were mapped to the mm10 version of the mouse reference genome using STAR Methods (v2.7.3a) and subsequent analyses were performed using samtools (v1.6) and BEDtools (v 2.29.2). Bigwig files were generated using deeptools (v.3.5.0) with the following parameters -bs 50 – normalize Using CPM and were displayed in the UCSC genome browser Per-transcript expression was quantified as FPKMs using featureCounts from the subread (v.1.6.3) package and annotated to the genes.gtf file of mm10 version of the mouse reference genome. ChIP RPM values for the region of TSS+/-2kb for each gene was calculated from the 3T3L1 ChIP seq samples (GSE95533) for Day 0, Day2, and Day 7. Also, RPM values of predicted and stitched enhancer genes (highest RPM) from the ChIP data is added into the RNA seq FPKM table. Analysis in Figures 3 and S3 focused on genes activated by adipogenesis which was defined by two filters on the FPKM values of processed data 1) WT_diff R 10 and 2) WT_diff/WT_undiff > 2. These two filters remove genes not well-expressed at 3-days of differentiation and focus on those genes that exhibit at least a 2-fold increase in expression at 3 days of differentiation. These two filters

e13 Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023

[Page 34]

give 369 genes as activated during adipogenesis. Using this list of 369 genes, the subset of MED1 DIDR-sensitive genes is defined as average(DIDR)/NT % 0.5. This filter gives a list of 63 DIDR-sensitive genes. In vitro droplet assay Components of the droplet assay were mixed together in protein storage buffer (50 mM Tris, 75 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 1mM PMSF, 1 mM DTT) and immediately loaded onto a homemade chamber comprising coverslip attached to a glass slide by parallel strips of double-sided tape. Droplets that settled on the coverslip were imaged using a Hamamatsu ORCA-Fusion C14440 digital camera and a CSU-W1 Yokogawa Spinning Disk Field Scanning Confocal System equipped with a Super Resolution by Optical Pixel Reassignment (SoRa) module. Images were acquired using a 60x Plan Apo Lambda Oil Immersion objective (NA, 1.40) with SoRa engaged. To test the partitioning of mCherry fusion proteins into mEGFP-MED1IDR droplets pre-formed by addition of total cellular RNA, 25 mM mEGFP-MED1IDR was mixed with 42.5 ng/uL total RNA extracted from U2OS cells using Qiagen RNeasy kit and then mixed with 4mM of mCherry-fusion as shown in Figure 4E. Similar experiments were performed in the absence of RNA where 8mM mEGFP-MED1IDR was with 1.75 mM mCherry fusions as shown in Figure S4B. To test whether mCherry fusions formed droplets on their own 42.5ng/uL was mixed with 4mM mCherry fusion protein as shown in Figure S4E. To test the partitioning of mutated IDRs and synthetic IDRs, 20uM mEGFP-MED1IDR was mixed with 40ng/uL total RNA and then mixed with 4mM mCherry fusion protein as indicated in Figures 5Q and S5L or 7mM mCherry fusion protein as indicated in Figure 5T. To test the ability of MED1IDR substitution and scramble mutants to form droplets in extract, 0.54mg/mL nuclear extract was mixed with 5mM of mEGFP-MED1IDR of indicated mutants as shown in Figure 7B. Analysis of in vitro droplet experiments To analyze in vitro droplet experiments, we used a Python script obtained from https://github.com/jehenninger/in_vitro_droplet_assay. The script was written to identify droplets and characterize their size, shape, and intensity. Beside using default parameters to identify droplets, parameters of circ, max_a and min_a were adjusted to identify the maximum number of droplets. The output file obtained for individual droplets (individual_output.xlsx) with unique IDs for each droplet was further analyzed and plotted using GraphPad prism version 9.3.1(350). Briefly, condensed fraction (C.F.) of channel (mCherry or GFP) in each field of view was plotted and the difference between group of a family were statistically tested using ordinary one-way ANOVA. As described previously,79 condensed fraction is defined as: c: f: channel = Ichannel; dropletOðIchannel; droplet + Ichannel; bulkÞ: Where, Ichannel,droplets is total intensity in the co droplet phase and Ichannel,bulk is total background intensity outside droplets. Analysis of protein sequence features Generating consensus IDR table with sequence parameters Consensus IDRs are defined as the overlapping ranges of disordered regions predicted by three different predictive methods: MobiDB,44 Metapredict116 and D2P2.115 For D2P2 disorder predictions, we used consensus sequence ranges for which 75% of predictors agree, and these regions were stitched if the difference between two IDRs was less than 10 amino acids. For MobiDB and Metapredict, we directly used the predicted ranges of disordered regions. Further, we generated a table of consensus IDR ranges for all UniProt-reviewed proteins by considering the overlapping predicted ranges from these three different disorder predictors. The minimum length cutoff used to define an IDR was 30 amino acids (Table S3). For each predicted consensus IDR sequence, we obtained the following sequence parameters: IDR length, NCPR, FCR, disorder promoting fraction, kappa, molecular weight, acidic fraction, basic fraction, aromatic patterning (U_aro), SCD, and fraction of all amino acids using the localCIDER algorithm. The fraction of aromatic residues was calculated using custom Perl scripts by counting the number of F, Y, W residues and dividing it by the total length of the IDR or protein in respective cases. The number of acidic, basic, and charged blocks were defined using a threshold of greater than or equal to the absolute value of 5 on NCPR sliding window (10 amino acid) using in-house Python and R scripts. The number of blocks were calculated by merging the adjacent overlapping sliding windows that satisfy previously mentioned threshold criteria (NCPR>=abs(5)). The charged blocks per residue was calculated by taking the sum of acidic and basic blocks predicted for each IDR and dividing it with the length of the sequence. Analysis of protein and IDR features from proteomics data Average pellet to supernatant fraction (P/S) values were used to determine the top 200 pellet enriched proteins and bottom 200 supernatant enriched proteins from the proteomics data. Using the Consensus IDR definition (>=30AA) we defined whether a pellet enriched protein or supernatant enriched protein contains at least one IDR. Average pellet to supernatant fraction (P/S) values were used to determine the top 200 pellet enriched IDRs (>=30AA) and bottom 200 supernatant enriched IDRs (>=30AA) from consensus ranges of the IDR dataset defined previously (Table S3). The proteins which do not have an IDR>=30 AA were removed from pellet and supernatant fractions (top and bottom fractions) to keep the IDR number uniform (200) for both categories. The P/S score for the top 200 IDRs ranges from 1325 to 30, whereas the P/S values for the bottom 200 IDRs ranges from 0.05 to 0.003. All IDRs (>=30AA) predicted by consensus IDR table for input proteins from the mass spectrometry data were considered as Input IDRs. Defining acidic and basic blocks The Net Charge Per Residue (NCPR) values were calculated for 10 amino acid sliding windows, and these values were used to define acidic and basic blocks on IDRs. If the sliding window NCPR values were greater than or equal to the absolute value of 5, then the respective window is defined as an acidic block or basic block based on the charge (negative: acidic, positive: basic). The number of

Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023 e14

[Page 35]

blocks were calculated by merging the adjacent overlapping sliding windows that satisfy previously mentioned threshold criteria (NCPR>=abs(5)). The charged blocks per residue value was calculated by taking the sum of these blocks predicted for a particular protein or IDR and by dividing it by the total length. IDR conservation analysis IDRs of different organisms used for the conservation analysis and heatmap representation were defined using MobiDB positions obtained from UniProt IDs and the parameters for these IDRs were calculated by using localCIDER or by calculating the charged blocks per residue using the above-mentioned method. The sequence identity values compared to human IDR were obtained using UniProt aligner with default parameters. GO analysis for blocky IDRs We sorted the consensus IDR table based on the number of merged blocks (both acidic and basic) and selected the top 500 IDRs in this ranking as the blockiest IDRs. Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed for their UniProt protein IDs using PANTHER Overrepresentation Test (v16.0) with slim molecular function categories and Fisher’s exact test. UniProt IDs of all consensus IDRs (>=30 amino acid) was used as background. The same analysis was also performed for sorted top 500 IDRs containing higher number of charge residues in their sequence with no patterning of charge into blocks. Design strategy for artificial IDR sequences Design of synthetic blocky IDRs The five synthetic IDR sequences were designed to each have the same length and have the same pattern of charge blocks and linker sequences. Using the sequences of CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR, we built three libraries of sequences: 1) amino acids found in acidic blocks, 2) amino acids found in basic blocks, and 3) amino acids found in intervening (linker) sequence. To avoid potential disruption to charge pattern, we removed all charge amino acids from the linker library. To ensure that each synthetic IDR had the same length, we fixed the length of acidic blocks and basic blocks to the average length found in CTR9IDR and SPT6IDR: 13 for acidic and 10 for basic. We fixed the linker length to the observed linker length in SPT6IDR and used the pattern of block type found in SPT6IDR. The scaffold for the synthetic IDR was therefore (each number indicates the length of the linker sequence, ‘‘A’’ is acidic block and ‘‘B’’ is basic block): 1-A-10-A-16-A-2-B-3-A-4-B-2-A-12-A-6-A-4-B-1. The three libraries were scrambled and then for each synthetic IDR sequences were pulled from each library and stitched together to fit the scaffold. This was repeated 5 times with each new IDR stitched together from randomly scrambled libraries. The amino acid sequences were ordered as codon optimized gene fragments from Twist Bioscience. See Table S1 for the sequences of all five synthetic IDRs. Design of NELFE blocky tentacle To make the NELFEtentacle blocky sequence, charged amino acids were rearranged without changing the position of non-charge amino acids. NELFEtentacle contains a perfectly mixed alternating acid and basic residues continuously for 48 amino acids (RD domain). The design centered around creating 6 blocks of 8 amino acids from this RD region and then charged amino acids from elsewhere in the sequence were rearranged to segregate charge into as close to 8 amino acid regions as possible. The amino acid sequence was ordered as a codon-optimized gene fragment from Twist Bioscience. See Table S1 for the sequence. 3T3-L1 addback experiments Lentivirus preparation for addback experiments of Med1IDR Mutants Lentiviral expression constructs were generated using pUltra plasmids (Addgene #24129). For lentivirus packaging, psPAX2 (Addgene #12260) and pMD2.G (Addgene #12259) plasmids were used. 6 mg amounts of lentiviral plasmids carrying mouse Med1 cDNA with mutation in the IDR (pUltra-MED1, pUltra-MED1(EDtoA) pUltra-MED1(RHKtoA)) were transfected together with 3 mg of GAG-Pol and VSVG-Rev plasmids into 293T cells in 10 cm plates using polyethyleneimine (MW25000, Polyscience Inc. #23966). 10mM forskolin (SIGMA #F3917) was added to the culture 16 hours after transfection, and supernatant was collected at 48 and 72 hours after transfection. Pooled viral supernatant was centrifuged and concentrated. Lentivirus preparation for addback experiments of Med1 Chimeras 6 wells of 293T cells (ATTC CRL-3216) at approximately 50% confluency were transfected with 3.3mg pUltra plasmids (Addgene #24129) containing cDNA for mouse MED1 chimeras, together with 2mg psPAX2-GAG-Pol-Rev (Addgene plasmid #12260), 0.85mg pAdVAntage (Promega E1711), and 1.3mg pCMV-VSV-G (Addgene plasmid #8454) using Lipofectamine 3000 transfection reagent (FisherScientific L3000015) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. At 48- and 72-hours post-transfection, culture medium containing virus was collected and passed through a 45mm PVDF filter onto 6 wells of Med1-KO 3T3-L1 cells at approximately 50% confluency. 50mg Polybrene (Sigma TR-1003) was added per well following each addition of virus. Infected 3T3-L1 cells were sorted for GFP signal, expanded, and frozen for future use. MED1IDR mutant and MED1 chimera addback experiments in Med1 KO 3T3-L1 The ability of MED1IDR mutants and MED1 chimeras to restore adipogenesis capacity in Med1 KO 3T3-L1 preadipocytes was assessed following the protocol described previously.60 Med1 KO 3T3-L1 clones #2 and #15 were infected with concentrated lentiviral particles and sorted for GFP-expressing cells. Differentiation was induced as described earlier in the methods section and monitored by qPCR to measure expression levels of key adipocyte genes and BODIPY staining to measure fat accumulation.

e15 Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023

[Page 36]

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS GraphPad Software was used for statistical analysis. Parametric or non-parametric tests were determined after performing a normality test on samples. GraphPad notation for p values was used on our reports: (ns p > 0.05, * p % 0.05, **p % 0.01 ***, p % 0.001, **** p % 0.0001). Multiple comparisons tests were Dunnett’s test or Dunn’s test for non-parametric samples against a control group. List of statistical analyses, related to Figures 1–7 Figure panel

Statistical test

Post-hoc test

Planned comparison

Sample size

1H

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs NELFB

R9

2H

two-tailed unpaired t-test

N/A

N/A

R10

2J

two-tailed unpaired t-test

N/A

N/A

R10

2M

two-tailed unpaired t-test

N/A

N/A

10

2P

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs CFP-LacI ("-")

R13

3D

two-tailed unpaired t-test

N/A

N/A

100

3F

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs control siRNA (ctrl.)

3

3J

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs NT control

3

3L

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs First bin

207

3N

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs non-targeting gRNA (NT) (left plot) or vs siRNA control (ctrl) (right plot)

63

4F

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

R9

4I

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

10

4L

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs mCherry only (no IDR control)

20

5A

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs partitioned IDRs

All IDRs, 14088; Extract IDRs, 3955; partitioned IDRs, 200; and Excluded IDRs, 200

5G

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs CTR9 IDR wildtype

10

5I

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs SPT6 IDR wildtype

10

5K

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

20

5M

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs ABABA

R12

5P

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

R12

5Q

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

R10

5S

one-way ANOVA

Dunn’s test

vs no IDR control

no IDR= 20; WT= 20; blocky= 16

5T

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs WT or vs no IDR

no IDR= 14; WT= 16; Blocky= 16

6C

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

15

6F

two-tailed unpaired t-test

N/A

charge pattern vs no pattern

13

6I

two-tailed unpaired t-test

N/A

charge pattern vs no pattern

8

7C

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs WT MED1 IDR

R10

7G left

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs WT MED1 IDR

20

7G middle

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs WT MED1 IDR

20

7G right

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs WT MED1 IDR

10

7I

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs WT MED1 IDR

3

7K

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs WT MED1 IDR

5

7N left

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

20

7N middle

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

20

7N right

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs no IDR control

10

7P

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs NC

7R

one-way ANOVA

Dunnett’s test

vs NC

Statistical details for supplemental figures are given in the supplemental figure legends.

Cell 186, 327–345.e1–e16, January 19, 2023 e16

[Page 37]

Supplemental figures

Figure S1. MED1IDR condensates partition a specific functional class of proteins distinct from those partitioned by NPM1, related to Figure 1 (A) Gene ontology analysis of top 40 MED1IDR pellet-enriched (pellet/sup) proteins from proteomics analysis. (B) Heatmap of log2 fold change values (pellet/sup) from proteomics analysis of two independent fractionation experiments. (C) Venn diagram of top 200 pellet-enriched proteins for MED1IDR and for NPM1. (D) Heatmap representing the presence and absence of indicated proteins.

[Page 38]

Figure S2. Genes associated with high local concentrations of MED1 also exhibit the highest transcriptional activity, related to Figure 2 (A) Boxplots (10%–90%) representing the read densities (RPKM) for RPB1, CTR9, SPT6, and NELFA at genes associated with enhancer regions with high MED1 occupancy (super-enhancers, SE, orange) or with low MED1 occupancy (typical enhancer genes, TE, gray) in mouse embryonic stem cells. (B) Metagene plot of RNA Pol II S5 phosphorylation (S5ph) read densities (RPM, reads per million) at gene body (TSS-TES) ± 2-kb for genes proximal to annotated enhancers in mESCs that either have high MED1 occupancy (super-enhancers, SE, orange) or low MED1 occupancy (typical enhancers, TE, gray). (C) Same as (B) but for RNA Pol II S2 phosphorylation (S2ph). (D) Highest occupancy of MED1 at a gene’s enhancer correlates with highest occupancy of S5 and S2 phosphorylated RNA Pol II within the gene body. (E) Highest occupancy of MED1 at a gene’s enhancer correlates with lowest traveling ratio of RNA Pol II. (F) Representative images of IF for MED14 (magenta) at indicated CFP-LacI control or MED1 fusion. Scale bars, 5 mm. (G) MED1IDR does not partition the Mediator complex. IF quantification of MED14 from experiments in S2F at indicated CFP-LacI control or MED1 fusion. Mean ± SEM. p values, one-way ANOVA vs. CFP-LacI.

[Page 39]

Figure S3. MED1IDR is required for gene activation during a cell-state transition, related to Figure 3 (A) Co-immunofluorescence in 3T3-L1 cells for MED1 (top row) and CTR9 (left middle row) or RPB1 (right middle row) before (D0) and three days after differentiation (D3). Scale, 5 mm.

(legend continued on next page)

[Page 40]

(B) Manders overlap coefficient per cell from samples shown in (A) giving a relative score for the degree of co-occurrence between MED1 and CTR9 (left) or RPB1 (right) for undifferentiated (black) or differentiated (pink) cells. Mean ± SEM. p values, two-tailed unpaired t test. (C) Immunoblot for indicated transcriptional regulators in undifferentiated (D0) and 3-day differentiated (D3) 3T3-L1 cells. Beta tubulin was included as a loading control. (D) Expression of MED1 and other transcriptional regulators is mostly unchanged during 3T3-L1 adipogenesis. Heatmaps representing log2 fold change in RNA levels. (E) Expression of adipocyte genes occurs in at least two discrete waves. Heatmaps representing log2 fold change in RNA levels. (F) Relative expression levels from RT-qPCR of siRNA-mediated knockdown targets 3 days after differentiation. (G) Quantification of percentage of cells in field of view with BODIPY (n = 5). Mean ± SD. p values, one-way ANOVA versus siRNA control. (H) Schematic of Med1 gene architecture indicating the exons targeted in 3T3-L1 CRISPR lines. (I) MED1DIDR interacts with Mediator complex. Immunoblot after co-IP of MED1 and MED4. (J) Quantification of percentage of cells in field of view with BODIPY (n = 5). Mean ± SD. (K) Relative expression levels of genes expressed in the first transcriptional wave of adipogenesis (n = 3). Mean ± SD. p values, one-way ANOVA vs NT control. (L) Relative expression levels of adipocyte genes across 7 days of differentiation (n = 3). Mean ± SD. p values, one-way ANOVA vs NT control. (M) Adipocyte-activated genes with annotated MED1 occupied enhancers were ranked by the fold increase from undifferentiated to day 2 differentiated and binned into 4 equal bins (n = 50). Boxplot. p values, one-way ANOVA vs first bin. (N) Same as (M) but expression relative to siRNA control for indicated knockdown is plotted. (O) Adipocyte-activated genes ranked by average (DIDR/NT) and binned into four equal bins (n = 92). Boxplot. p values, one-way ANOVA vs first bin.

[Page 41]

(legend on next page)

[Page 42]

Figure S4. IDRs of partitioned factors are necessary and sufficient to recapitulate selective partitioning, related to Figure 4 (A) Cartoon depiction of mCherry-IDR proteins and mEGFP-MED1IDR partitioning experiments, performed without adding exogenous RNA. (B) Representative micrographs of droplets formed upon mixing recombinant mEGFP-MED1IDR and indicated mCherry fusion. Scale, 2 mm. (C) Boxplot (10%–90%) representation of quantification of mCherry signal inside mEGFP-MED1IDR droplets presented as condensed fraction (mCherry in/out of droplets). p values, one-way ANOVA vs no IDR control. (D) Cartoon depiction of mCherry-IDR proteins tested in presence of total RNA but in the absence of mEGFP-MED1IDR. (E) MCherry IDRs do not form droplets on their own under these reaction conditions. Scale, 10 mm. (F) Boxplot (10%–90%) representation of condensed fraction of mCherry signal. p values, one-way ANOVA vs no IDR control. (G) Cartoon depiction of experimental setup. (H) Representative images of mCherry-MED1IDR (top row) tested for partitioning into indicated CFP-LacI-IDR foci (bottom row). Scale, 5 mm. (I) Boxplot (10%–90%) showing quantification of partition coefficient for experiments shown in (H). p values, one-way ANOVA vs no IDR control. (J) Cartoon depiction of experimental setup. (K) Representative images of mCherry IDRs (top row) tested for partitioning into CFP-LacI (no fusion) foci (bottom row). Scale, 5 mm. (L) Boxplot (10%–90%) showing quantification of partition coefficients for experiments shown in (K). p values, one-way ANOVA vs no IDR control. (M) Cartoon depiction of experimental setup. (N) Representative images of additional mCherry IDRs (top row) tested for partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci (bottom row). Scale, 5 mm. (O) Boxplot (10%–90%) showing quantification of partition coefficients for experiments shown in (N). p values, one-way ANOVA vs no IDR control.

[Page 43]

(legend on next page)

[Page 44]

Figure S5. Patterned blocks of acidic and basic residues in IDRs are necessary and sufficient for selective partitioning, related to Figure 5 (A) Comparative analysis shows partitioned IDRs do not have significant differences in fraction of disorder-promoting amino acids compared to other IDR classes tested (All IDRs, 14088; Extract IDRs, 3956; partitioned IDRs, 200; and excluded IDRs, 200). Boxplots (10%–90%) representing the comparison of fraction of disorder-promoting amino acids for listed groups. p values represent one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons of partitioned IDRs to all others (ns, p>0.05). (B) Same as (A) for fraction aromatic. (C) Sama as (A) for Omega aromatic. In this group, IDRs without any aromatic residues were excluded. Therefore, the number for each group are: all IDRs, 10,192; extract IDRs, 2,799; partitioned IDRs, 154; and excluded IDRs, 135. (D) Partitioned IDRs have a compositional bias for certain amino acids (E, D, K, and R) relative to excluded IDRs. Boxplot (10%–90%) representing fraction of all 20 amino acids for either partitioned (orange) or excluded (cyan) IDRs. p values represent Wilcox test with significance cut-off at p < 0.01 (****, p < 0.0001; ***, p < 0.001; **, p < 0.01). (E) Same as (A) for fraction acidic. (F) Same as (A) for fraction basic. (G) Same as (A) for NCPR. (H) Same as (A) for kappa. (I) Same as (A) for SCD. (J) Correlation analysis of partition coefficient and kappa for all IDRs tested in Lac array cells (Figures 4I and S4O). The r2 value represents a goodness of fit for a linear regression. (K) Same as (J) for SCD. (L) Left: NCPR plots for SPT6IDR, SPT6IDR CS (charge scramble mutant), or SPT6IDR NCS (non-charge scramble mutant #3). Middle: representative images of SPT6IDR, charge scramble, and non-charge scramble SPT6IDR (4 mM) partitioning into GFP-MED1IDR (20 mM) droplets formed in presence of RNA (40 ng/uL). Scale 2 mm. Right: boxplot (10%–90%) representation of condensed fraction of mCherry signal. p values represent one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons relative to the SPT6IDR (***, p < 0.001; ns, p > 0.05). (M) Heatmap for kappa (k), fraction of charged residues (FCR), disorder-promoting fraction values (predicted using localCIDER algorithm), number of acidic and basic blocks, and the percentage of sequence identity compared to human sequence were plotted for CTR9IDR as defined by MobiDB for indicated organisms. Each value for individual parameters were normalized to the maximum value of the column, and scale bar is represented by color intensities ranging from white to red (min to max). (N) Sequence conservation of charge patches across organisms is represented for CTR9IDR sequence (inside black boxes). Middle black line represents the residue length, and the positioning of basic and acidic blocks (10 amino acid window NCPR R abs(5)) is shown as dark blue bars or dark red bars, respectively. Sequence conservation of these charge blocks across organisms is represented on top of respective blocks using Clustal alignments. (O) Same as S(M) for SPT6IDR. (P) Same as (N) for SPT6IDR. (Q) Gene Ontology of the top 500 blockiest IDRs in the human proteome and top 500 highest charged IDRs that do not contain blocks. All IDRs in Table S4 were used as background (STAR Methods). (R) NCPR plots for the disordered region of CTR9 and transcriptional repressors tested in (S). See Figure 5B for explanation. (S) Representative images of additional mCherry IDRs (top row) tested for partitioning into CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci (bottom row). Insets show magnified region at LacO locus (white box). The white color on bottom-row inset shows IDR overlap with MED1IDR signal. Scale, 5 mm. (T) IDRs of tested transcriptional repressors fail to partition into MED1IDR. Quantification of partition coefficients for experiments shown in panel (S). Data represented as boxplot (10%–90%). p values represent Dunn’s test for multiple comparisons relative to no IDR control (****, p < 0.0001; ns, p > 0.05). (U) NCPR plots for CTR9IDR and other IDRs reported to phase separate by interactions among charged residues. See Figure 5B for explanation. (V) Charged IDRs without patterned charge blocks fail to partition into MED1IDR. Representative images of mCherry IDRs (top row) tested for partitioning into CFPLacI-MED1IDR foci (bottom row). Insets show magnified region at LacO locus (white box). The white color on bottom-row inset shows IDR overlap with MED1IDR signal. Scale, 5 mm. (W) Quantification of partition coefficient for experiments shown in (V). Data as boxplot (10%–90%). p values represent Dunn’s test for multiple comparisons relative to no IDR control (****, p < 0.0001; ns, p > 0.05).

[Page 45]

Figure S6. Introducing IDRs with alternating charge blocks in NELFE leads to NELF complex partitioning and a decrease in gene activation, related to Figure 6 (A) Representative images of NELFE chimeras tested for partitioning into CFP-LacI foci (no IDR fusion). This is a control for experiments shown in Figure 6B. Scale, 1 mm.

(legend continued on next page)

[Page 46]

(B) Boxplot (10%–90%) showing quantification of partition coefficient for experiments shown in (A). p values represent one-way ANOVA against mCherry without IDR (ns, p > 0.05) (n = 20). (C) Representative images of control experiments for Figure 6H in Lac array cells. Column 1 shows CFP-LacI focus without MCP signal enrichment (row 1). Columns 2–4 show CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci (row 3) co-transfected with miRFP670-MCP (row 1) and three different conditions: mCherry only, mCherry-CTR9IDR, or mCherry-SPT6IDR (row 2). Far-red MCP signal is present in CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci despite mCherry-CTR9IDR/SPT6IDR partitioning (columns 3 and 4, row 1). Scale, 1 mm. (D) Graph showing line profile of relative miRFP670-MCP signal centered at CFP foci from experiments in (C). Data shown as mean ± SEM (n = 10). (E) Quantification of relative miRFP670-MCP signal (line profile method as Figure 2M) in LacO foci from experiments in (C) (n = 10). Data shown as mean ± SEM. p values represent one-way ANOVA test for multiple comparisons against CFP-LacI-MED1IDR co-transfected with mCherry (no IDR).

[Page 47]

(legend on next page)

[Page 48]

Figure S7. Patterning of local charge density on IDRs is required for selective partitioning, reporter gene activation, and cell-state transition, related to Figure 7 (A) Heatmap for kappa (k), fraction of charged residues (FCR), disorder-promoting fraction values (predicted using localCIDER algorithm), number of acidic and basic blocks, and the percentage of sequence identity compared to human sequence were plotted for long C-terminal IDRs of MED1 defined by MobiDB for indicated organisms. Each value for individual parameters were normalized to the maximum value of the column, and scale bar is represented by color intensities ranging from white to red (min to max). (B) Sliding net charge (10-residue window, black) is shown for long C-terminal IDRs of MED1 defined by MobiDB for indicated organisms. Red bars represent acidic residues, and blue bars represent basic residues. Y axis represents sliding charge index. The positioning of basic patches (10 amino acid window NCPR R abs (5)) is shown as dark blue bars on top of the boxes. Sequence conservation of these charge patches across organisms is represented on top of respective patches using Clustal alignments. (C) Representative images of mCherry-HP1aIDR tested for partitioning into wild-type and mutant CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci (listed on left of each row) in Lac array cells. Scale, 1 mm. (D) Boxplot (10%–90%) of partition coefficient (Z scores) for mCherry-HP1aIDR relative to the partitioning of mCherry without IDR in wild-type and mutant CFPLacI-MED1IDR foci. p values represent one-way ANOVA test for multiple comparisons against HP1aIDR with wild-type MED1IDR, n = 10 (***, p < 0.001; **, p < 0.01). (E) Representative images of mCherry without IDR fusion tested for partitioning into wild-type and mutant CFP-LacI-MED1IDR foci (listed on left of each row) in Lac array cells. These experiments were used as a reference for the Z score calculation in Figures 7 and S7D. Scale, 1 mm. (F) Graph showing line profile of relative mCherry-MCP signal centered at CFP foci from experiments in Figures 7F and 7G. Data shown as mean ± SD. N = 10. (G) Relative expression levels of Med1 for indicated addbacks in 3T3-L1 Med1 KO clones #2 and #15 after 3 days of differentiation. Data are represented as mean ± SD. Values are normalized to the wild-type Med1 addback. p values represent one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons to WT (****, p < 0.0001; ***, p < 0.001; **, p < 0.01; *, p < 0.05). (H) Related to Figure 7I. Relative expression of adipocyte genes after induction (day 3) for the indicated addback experiments (x axis) in Med1 KO clone #15. Data are represented as mean ± SD. Values are normalized to the positive control (WT). p values represent one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons to WT (****, p < 0.0001; ns, p > 0.05). (I) Representative image of BODIPY staining for NC for Med1 KO clone #15. Scale, 20 mm. (J) Relative expression levels of adipocyte genes in 3T3-L1 Med1 KO clone #2 + addback experiments after 3 days of differentiation. Data are represented as mean ± SD. Values are normalized to WT. p values represent one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons to WT. Related to Figure 7I. (K) Representative images of Med1 KO clone #2 + indicated addback construct stained after 9 days of differentiation to identify neutral lipid droplet accumulation (BODIPY shown in red) and to identify cell nuclei (DAPI). Scale, 20 mm. (L) Quantification of percentage of cells in field of view with BODIPY-stained fat droplets for 3T3-L1 Med1 KO clone #2 transduced with indicated construct, normalized to wild-type MED1 (WT), after 9-day differentiation. Data are represented as mean ± SD. n = 5 fields of view. p values represent one-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons to WT (****, p < 0.0001). (M) NCPR plots for controls and blocky IDRs listed on the left and tested in Figures 7M and (N). (N) Representative images of ‘‘blocky IDRs’’ (listed on top) as CFP-LacI fusions tested with different mCherry fusions to assess partitioning (row 1 mCherry without fusion, row 2 for NELFEtentacle, row 3 NELFEblocky tentacle). White color in merged CFP channel (bottom inset in each row) shows overlap. Scale, 1 mm. (O) Boxplot (10%–90%) of partition coefficients (Z scores) showing standardized values relative to no IDR mCherry control for each individual CFP-LacI fusion shown in (N) (n = 20). p values represent one-way ANOVA test for multiple comparisons against CFP-LacI with no IDR (****, p < 0.0001; *, p < 0.05; ns, p > 0.05). (P) Graph showing line profile of relative mCherry-MCP signal centered at CFP foci from experiments in Figure 7M (row 3). Data shown as mean ± SD (n = 10). (Q) Relative expression levels of MED1 chimeras in 3T3-L1 addback experiments normalized to MED1IDR (n = 3). Data shown as mean ± SD.
