[Page 1]

J. Mol. Biol. (1994) 237, 125-156

Nucleic Acid Structure Analysis

Mathematics for Local Cartesian and Helical Structure Parameters That

Are Truly Comparable Between Structures

Marla S. Babcock! ?, Edwin P. D. Pednault? and Wilma K. Olson?

‘Graduate Program in Microbiology and Molecular Biology and 2 Department of Chemistry, Rutgers—the State University of New Jersey New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.

3AT4&T Bell Laboratories, Holmdel, NJ 07733, U.S.A.

Analyzing nucleic acid structures in a comparable manner has become increasingly important as the number of solved structures has increased. This paper presents the concepts, mathematics, theorems, and proofs that form the basis of a new program to analyze three-dimensional DNA and RNA structures. The approach taken here provides numerical data in accordance with guidelines set at a 1988 EMBO workshop. Mathematical definitions are provided for ail local structural parameters described in the guidelines. The definitions satisfy the guideline requirements while preserving the original physical intuition of the parameters. In particular, the rotational parameters are true rotations based on a simple physical model (net rotation at constant angular velocity), not Euler angles or angles between vectors and planes as is the case with other approaches. As a result, the mathematical definitions are symmetrical with the property that a 5° tilt is the same as a 5° roll and a 5° twist, except that the rotations take place about different axes. In other approaches, a 5° tilt can mean a different amount of net rotation than a 5° roll or a 5° twist. A second unique feature of the mathematics is that it explicitly incorporates the concept of a pivot point, which is the point about which a base in a base-pair rotates as it buckles, propeller twists, and opens. Pivot points enable one to model the physical motion of bases more accurately. As a result, they greatly reduce and/or eliminate the statistical correlations between rotational and translational parameters that arise as mathematically induced artifacts in other approaches. This paper, together with the statistical analysis in the companion paper for determining the locations of the pivot points, provides everything needed to understand the output of the program as it relates to individual structures.

Keywords: mathematics for nucleic acid structure parameters; nucleic acid structure analysis

1. Introduction

Understanding how the structure of the DNA affects its functioning is becoming more important aS more genome data are acquired. Organisms have many possible ways of eliciting a desired genetic response, such as the recognition and binding by proteins of different nucleotide sequences with varying specificities. Researchers trying to control viruses such as AIDS are trying every possible treatment, including attempts to design drugs that specifically recognize the nucleic acid sequence unique to the viral genome. Methods for calculating the range of allowable configurations from the growing number of solved nucleic acid crystal structures have become particularly important for understanding the specificity of both drug-DNA and pro-

0022-2836/94/110125-32 $08.00/0

125

tein-DNA sequence recognition. As part of an effort to understand nucleic acid structures more clearly, participants at a 1988 EMBO workshop in Cambridge, England created guidelines for mathematical parameters that describe spatial relationships between neighboring bases (e.g. Cartesian versus helical) and across a base-pair (Diekmann, 1988, 1989; Sarma, 1988; Dickerson, 1989; Dickerson ef al., 1989). Cartesian parameters involve rotations and translations about three orthogonal axes (i.e, X, Y and Z), whereas the helical parameters entail an uncoupling of the rotations and translations so that the rotations occur only about one axis: namely, the helical axis.

While there were many programs already avail-

able for the analysis of nucleic acid structures at the time of the EMBO workshop (Fratini et al., 1982;

© 1994 Academic Press Limited

[Page 2]

126 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Srinivasan et al., 1987; von Kitzing & Diekmann, 1987; Bhattacharyya & Bansal, 1988a,6; Lavery & Sklenar, 1988, 1989; Soumpasis & Tung, 1988; Srinivasan & Olson, 1988), many of the desirable features sought by the participants were not available in a single program. The features regarded as important and necessary include: (1) the ability to calculate true rotations rather than angles between base planes; (2) the determination of parameters with magnitudes independent of the strand and direction; (3) the capability to reconstruct models, including those in mix and match molecular reconstructions, with parameter values comparable to the original structures; (4) the calculation of all 18 requested rigid-body parameters (3 rotations and 3 translations for complementary, Cartesian, and helical neighboring base-pair parameters); (5) the incorporation of rigorous mathematics that recognize the connection between Cartesian and helical neighboring base parameters; and (6) the ability to analyze comparably any of the solved crystallographic structures based upon the relationships of the base-pairs, be they Watson—Crick, Hoogsteen, etc. In addition to these properties, which were central to the design, an effort has been made in the implementation of our program to achieve a friendly and flexible user interface. In this paper, the solid mathematics, which make the program unique, are presented fully so that the user can understand and have confidence in the numbers derived from the program.

2. Method

(a) Overview of the physical interpretation of the method

One of the problems with any piece of software is that, almost as soon as the program is written, someone always wishes that it did things just slightly differently or could do just a little bit more. With this in mind, we tried to design a program for analysis of nucleic acid structure with a central core of mathematics, but with the flexibility to contro] almost everything else. The user controls the input, what is analyzed, and the standard to which comparisons are made. There is also a large collection of post-processors that ajlow the user to look at and combine results from many different statistical viewpoints.

Since our program allows the user so much flexibility, an understanding of the physical meaning of our method will aid the user in taking advantage of the available choices. Figure | illustrates how the coordinate frames are determined for each base of an experimental structure. The base-pair coordinate frame for an ideal base-pair is

defined as shown in Figure I(a) by placing the atoms of

the purine and pyrimidine rings along with the C,,, atoms, in the desired orientation in relation to an origin at (0.0.0), and X-axis defined by the vector (1,0,0), a Y-axis defined by the vector (0,1,0), and a Z-axis defined by the vector (0,0,1). The atom locations in relation to this ideal base-pair coordinate frame are stored in a “standards” file. The standards file contains the base type, the atom names, and the X, Y and Z-coordinates of the atoms for each base. Since the paired bases in antiparallel structures are related by flipping the atoms of one base by 180° about the X-axis, thereby negating the Y and Z-coordinates, only one set of atomic coordinates for each

X(1.0,0)

X(1,0,0) ‘ 0 (0,0,0)

Y(0,1,0)

2(0,0,1) X(1,0,0) NaN

(0,10) « Y¥ 200-1)

Figure 1. Fitting the coordinate frames of the ‘‘standard” bases to the experimental bases. (a) Coordinate frames are first assigned to pairs of ideal standard bases in their ideal pairing relationships. (b and c) The base-pair coordinate frames are then assigned to the corresponding standard bases, with the Y-axes pointing toward the backbone of the strand to which the base is attached. (d) Assignment of a coordinate frame to the non-planar base dihydrouridine. (e and f) Coordinate frames are assigned to the experimental bases in a structure by performing a least-squares fit of the standard bases to the experimental bases and then transferring the coordinate frames of the standard bases to the experimental bases. (g) Once the coordinate frame of each experimentally determined base has been positioned, only the coordinate frames need be kept for the analysis.

base relationship need be stored (Figure 1(b), (¢) and (d)). For planar bases, the Z-coordinate is normally zero, as for the pyrimidine and purine in Figure l(b) and (c). For non-planar bases, such as dihydrouridine, each atom will be identified not only by X and ¥-coordinates, but also by Z-coordinates, which are typically non-zero (Figure 1(d}). Our program is unique in allowing non-planar bases to be explicitly dealt with.

The first step in the analysis of a nucleic acid coordinate file ts to identify the correct base standard to use in order to identify the appropriate coordinate frame. A given base may have multiple standards, each with a different base name and coordinate frame depending upon the expected base-pairing relationship of that base with different basepairing partners. Thus, there could be several guanine base standards: a G whose expected pairing partner is C (cytosine), a UG that is paired with U (uracil), and a USG for a G in the syn conformation paired with U. The names

[Page 3]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 127

of the atoms in the standards file are then used to identify the experimental atoms needed for defining the coordinate frame (Figure I(e)). The next step is to move both the standard atoms and their coordinate frame through space, keeping their relationship to each other fixed, until the atoms of the standard are as close to those of the experimental base as possible (Figure 1(f)). The goodness of fit is determined by taking the square-root of the sum of the squared differences between the X, Y and Z-coordinates of each standard base against the corresponding coordinates of the experimental base. When the best fit is found, the coordinate frame of the standard base is fixed to the experimental base. Once the coordinate frame is fixed in space, there is no further need to keep track of the base atoms from either the experimental base or the “standard” base; only the coordinate frame is needed (Figure 1({g)}. The process is repeated until coordinate frames have been assigned to all of the experimental bases using the appropriate base standards.

Once the coordinates frames have been found for each base, the user then specifies what type of calculations he or she wishes to perform. The choices are to calculate (1) complementary base parameters from one base to its base-pairing partner, (2) neighboring parameters from one base to another along the same strand, or (3) neighboring parameters from one base-pair plane to its neighbor. In the first instance, one of the two bases is selected as being dominant and the orientations of the Y and Z-axes of the other base are negated to point approximately in the direction of the dominant coordinate frame. With the exception of flipping some of the axes for complementary calculations, there is no difference between the calculation of complementary or neighboring —base/base-pair parameters.

Figure 2 illustrates how complementary base rotational and translational parameters are found by mathematically mimicking a physical motion of the 2 base coordinate frames in space. The starting position for the complementary caleulations is shown in Figure 2(a} with the Y and Z-axes already flipped. The first step is to rotate the second orthogonal coordinate frame simultaneously until the axes are aligned with the directions of the first coordinate frame (represented as broken lines in Figure 2(b)). Next, the second coordinate frame is rotated halfway back toward its starting position (broken coordinate frame in Figure 2(c}). Then, the first coordinate frame is rotated until it aligns with the second coordinate frame (broken lines in Figure 2(d)). The directions of the midway coordinate frame have now been located. The final step is to translate the two origins halfway towards each other until they align (Figure 2(e)). The translational vector (broken lines) is expressed in the units of the midway coordinate frame. The final coordinate frame (bold) is shown in Figure 2(f).

In order to calculate neighboring base/base-pair parameters, the same operations are performed except that the second coordinate frame is not flipped as with the complementary parameters. The use of the same mathematics for complementary and neighboring base-pair calculations is unique to our program.

The final question is how are the rotations performed? A conventional approach is to perform rotations sequentially about the X, ¥ and Z-axes. Figure 3(a) illustrates the problem with sequential rotations by using a Rubic’s® cube with one blackened. one crossed, and one dotted square in order to keep track of the cube orientations. When the rotations are performed first about the X-axis and then about the Y-axis, simply reversing the direction of the rotations about the X-axis and then about the

Figure 2. Rotations and translations performed in calculating the coordinate frames of experimental basepairs. (a) The coordinate frames of the bases in an experimental base-pair. (b) The coordinate frame of the base on the secondary strand is first rotated until its axes are aligned with the axes of the coordinate frame of the base on the primary strand. (c) The coordinate frame of the secondary base is then rotated halfway back to its original position. (d) The coordinate frame of the primary strand base is then rotated until it aligns with the secondary base coordinate frame. (e} The base-pair origin is taken as the midpoint between the 2 base coordinate frames after all rotations have been performed. (f) The final base-pair coordinate frame is thus defined from the common origin with the directions of the X, Y and Z-axes aligned with those of the 2 bases in their final rotated orientations.

Y-axis does not return the cube to its original location. This is iustrated by the 5th cube in Figure 3(a) in which the blackened box is located in the top, left corner after 4 rotations, instead of the front right corner, which was the starting position. The reason is that after each rotation the reference coordinate frame is different. In order to

Figure 3. Rotations performed (a) sequentially versus

those performed (b) simultaneously. See the text for discussion.

[Page 4]

128 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

return to the starting position, the reverse rotations must be performed with respect to the same reference frames as before, which requires that the order of rotation (X then ¥) must be reversed. Because the order of rotation is typically held fixed, the values of the parameters for the reverse rotations would necessarily have to be quite different from those for the forward rotations. The problems associated with sequential rotations can be avoided, however, by performing the same overall motion with a single rotation about the diagonal of the cube (Figure 3(b)). The blackened, crossed and dotted squares can, in a single motion, be moved from the front right corner to the bottom left corner of the Figure. This orientation is equivalent to the 3rd cube above in (a), which resulted from 2 sequential rotations. Reversing the direction of this single rotation returns the cube to its starting position (3rd cube in Figure 3(b)), which is the desired result.

Now that the basic idea has been presented of what mechanically is being mimicked in our program, the details of the method can be carefully examined.

(b) Defining the standard

The first point of user control is the definition of the base coordinate frame. By fixing the coordinate frame, the user knows exactly what the zero calibration is. This external standard ensures that comparisons are valid from structure to structure. The reference file that defines the standards resembles a Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (Bernstein ef al., 1977) file with residue names, atom names, and coordinates that place the atoms in each standard residue in an appropriate relationship to the coordinate axis system for that residue. Each standard file has an implicit coordinate axis system and origin that depends upon the expected pairing relationship of the base.

The reference file that is supplied with the program contains ideal base ring atom positions (6 for pyrimidines, 9 for purines) along with the C,,, sugar atom coordinates. The atomic positions for reference bases that form Watson-Crick pairs (ie. A, T, G and C) are the same as those used by Srinivasan ef al. (1987), except that the atomic coordinates are displaced by 0-230 A toward the major groove. The displacement is done to conform with the EMBO guidelines so that the Y-axis of each base (designated by the Cig)-Cigs) Vector) is parallel to what would be the C,,-C,, vector if the base were paired in an ideal pairing relationship with its complementary base, and is chosen to pass through the C,¢, atom of the pyrimidine in the ideal base-pair. In keeping with the EMBO guidelines, the direction of the Y-axis is chosen so that it points toward the backbone of the strand to which the base is attached. The X-axis is perpendicular to the Y-axis and lies in the plane of the base, pointing into what would be the major groove if the base were paired with its complement in an ideal base-pair and intersecting the midpoint of the C,,,-C,,, vector in the ideal base-pair. The Z-axis follows from the right-hand rule, forming an orthogonal coordinate system. The origin of each base is at the intersection of its three axes. The creation of standards for bases that are not in Watson—Crick pairing relationships is beyond the scope of this paper and will be described elsewhere. Note that because a reference file is used to establish the position and orientation of each base coordinate frame, the program can be readily expanded to handle new and unusual bases and base-pairing relationships. In addition, the user can always impose his or her

own notion of a base coordinate frame in the analysis by supplying a suitable reference file.

The coordinate frames defined by the reference file are imposed on each base in an experimentally determined nucleic acid structure by performing a least-squares fitting of the appropriate ideal base in the reference file to the corresponding bases in the structure. The leastsquares fitting involves minimizing the sum of the squares of the distances of each experimental atom to the reference atom of the same name. The resulting position and orientation of the reference base determines the coordinate frame of the experimental base. A closed-form solution developed by Horn (1987) is used in the program to calculate the rotations and translations of the reference base that achieves the least-squares fit.

The least-squares fitting step is extemely important for consistency of structural comparisons as well as model building. The only differences between the atom positions of a structure reconstructed from the derived parameters and the original coordinates are those resulting from the least-squares fitting of the ideal standards to the experimental bases. In fact, structure generation is so good that it is possible to reconstruct hybrid models formed by taking parts of different structures and piecing them together (Figure 4).

There are other advantages to using a least-squares fitting to define the origin and X, Y and Z-axes of a base. As discussed above, the user can modify the axis system, if desired, by changing the positions of the reference atoms. In addition, axis systems can be defined for unusual base-pairs, intercalated drugs, or associated amino acid residues, allowing such features to be analyzed in a comparable manner along with the ordinary basepairs in a nucleic acid structure. The axis system of a non-Watson-Crick base-pair (e.g. G:-U or syn G-U), is equivalent to that of a Watson-Crick base-pair, except for different angles between the C.-C, line and the individual glycosy! bonds. As discussed in the companion paper (Babcock & Olson, 1994), this treatment of unusual base-pairing avoids erroneous conclusions that can arise by assuming a Watson—Crick base-pair relationship in an unusual base-pair. Once the axis system has been defined for each base, the calculations of rotations and translations can be performed.

(c) Calculation of coordinate frames via least-squares fitting

The equations for calculating the position and orientation of the coordinate frame of each base in a structure are expressed in matrix form. To derive these equations, consider some atom with absolute X, Y, Z-coordinates (Px; Py; Pz), which can be represented as a column vector

Pp:

Pz

As a notational convention, lower case boldface letters (e.g. p) are used throughout for points and vectors, and lower case italic letters (e.g. p,, p, and p,) for the individual X, Y¥ and Z-coordinates of these 3-dimensional quantities.

In addition to the absolute coordinate frame, which is used to define the absolute X, Y and Z-coordinates of all the atoms in a structure, each base and base-pair has its

own local coordinate frame. A given atom will therefore have different coordinate values in éath of the different

[Page 5]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Figure 4. Hybrid reconstruction combining bases from 1BNA (Drew et af., 1981), a B-form DNA, and LTN2 (Brown et al., 1985), a transfer RNA that resembles A-form DNA. Structure names from the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (Bernstein et al., 1977). Bases 1 to 5 correspond to base-pairs 2 to 6 in the 1BNA coordinate file, while the junction is created by the parameters defining the base-pair planes between base-pairs 6 and 7 from the 1 BNA structure. Residues 6 to 10 are base-pairs 2 to 6 from the 1TN2 file, including a G-U base-pair. The second junction is created by the parameters defining the base-pair planes between base-pairs 6 and 7 of 1TN2. The final segment is made up of base-pairs 7 to 11 from 1BNA. The calculated parameters from the original structures and those from the reconstruction are listed in Appendix C. Left: original coordinates. Right: reconstruction from parameters.

base and base-pair coordinate frames, owing to the fact that each of these frames has a different position and orientation with respect to the absolute frame. To perform the least-squares fitting, equations are needed to transform atomic coordinates measured in each base frame into absolute atomic coordinates. To derive these equations, let the column vector:

this is the Pix representation of P; = Piy

point p in frame i Piz

be the coordinate values of the atom as measured in base

frame 7. In addition, let:

be the absolute origin of the coordinate frame for base 7, and let:

Xix Yix 2x x;= Xiy y¥;= Viy and ZZ; >= Ziy

[Page 6]

130 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Figure 5. The X and Y-coordinates of an atom as measured in the absolute coordinate frame (p,, p,) and in

the local coordinate frame (p;,, pjy) of base (or base-pair) i.

A similar relationship between the absolute and local coordinate frames holds for the Z-coordinates.

be the absolute X, Y and Z-unit vectors, respectively, that define the X, Y and Z-axes of the coordinate frame for base i. The relationship between the local coordinate frame of base 2 and the absolute coordinate frame is illustrated in Figure 5 for the case of the X and Y-coordinates. A similar relationship holds for the Z-coordinates.

The absolute coordinates p of an atom can be determined from the coordinates p; as measured in frame i by starting at the origin o, of frame i and moving an amount Pix long the X-axis vector x,, an amount p,, along the Y-axis vector y,, and an amount p;, along the Z-axis vector z;. This yields the following set of equations for calculating p from p;:

vector, since it defines the amount by which the origin of frame 7 is displaced away from the origin of the absolute coordinate frame. When taken together, R; and o; define the axis system for coordinate frame 7.

In the least-squares fitting procedure, equation (1) is used to superimpose an ideal base structure over the experimentally determined base structure so as to minimize the total squared distances between the ideal base atoms and the experimentally determined positions. In applying equation (1), p; represents the ideal position of a base atom as seen from the base coordinate frame, and p represents the position of the atom as seen from the absolute coordinate frame once the ideal base is superimposed over the experimental base. Equation (1) is applied to each atom in the ideal base. This allows the total squared distances to be computed as follows. If n atoms from the ideal base are used in the fitting process

and their coordinates are aj,, a;,, . -., a,,, where:

7x a=) iy Qi i2 then the superimposed coordinates §;,, $;,, ..., S;, are

given by:

=R,a;,+0, 1<jsx.

If the corresponding atoms in the experimental base have

coordinates €,,, @;,, .-., &, where:

ijpx f= | Siyy Cie

then the total squared distances 6? between the superimposed ideal base and the experimental base equal the

sum of the squared differences in the X, Y and Z-coordinates of the corresponding atoms:

the reference positions of the atoms in a base express their representation in the frame, so these are the points to which this transformation is applied to get the absolute positions in space

These equations can be written more concisely in vector form as:

Py = Pixtix F Piy Vix + Pizrix + Oi

Py = PixXiy + Piy Yiy + PizZiy + Oiy a n

P= Pix%iz + Piy Viz + Piz7iz + O72: oF = y le,,-s,,? = > (€i,x—8i,x)7 + j=l

2 2 (Ci,y —Si,y) + (6,2 Si,2) .

The rotation matrix R; and origin vector 0; that minimize 6? are the rotation matrix and origin vector that define the coordinate frame of the experimental base. A variety of techniques are presented in the literature to perform this minimization. The technique used in the program is a closed-form solution developed by Horn (1987).

Once the base axis systems have been determined through the least-squares fitting procedure, no further use of the original structure is made. The rotation matrices

P = PixXit PyYi t PizZit 9;,

and even more concisely in matrix form as: transformation goes from the representation

in frame i to the absolute positions p = R,p;+9;, (1)

where R, is the matrix whose columns are the X, Y and Z-unit vectors of coordinate frame 2:

Xx Yix Yix

after representing the points in | oy Yn and origin locations of the bases provide all of the

frame i, these should be aligned i ty iy yy inf . . , ; ly d ‘-onstruct. thi

to the reference positions Lie Vie 2 mformation necessary to analyze and reconstruct the tz tz iz

structure. Throughout the paper. upper case boldface letters (e.g. R) are used for matrices, and lower case italic letters for the entries of matrices.

Equation (J) allows the absolute coordinates p of an

(d) Relalive position and orientation of coordinate frames

The calculation of rotations and translations between

atom to be calculated from the coordinates p; measured with respect to coordinate frame 7. In this way, equation (1) precisely defines the relationships between the absolute coordinate frame and the coordinate frames of each individual base and base-pair i. The matrix R; is referred to as a rotation matrix because it defines the angular orientation of coordinate frame i. The origin location 0; is called an origin vector or a translation

different pairs of coordinate frames is performed using the axis systems obtained through the least-squares fitting process. In developing our approach, we have found it useful first to analyze the relationship between coordinate frames in terms of rotation matrices and translation vectors, and then to consider how to parameterize these matrices and vectors in terms of complementary base-pair parameters (i.e. buckle, propeller twist, opening, shear,

[Page 7]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 131

stretch and stagger) and neighboring base and base-pair parameters (i.e. tilt. roll, twist, shift, slide, rise, ete.). While there can be many definitions of complementary and neighboring parameters following the EMBO guidelines (Fratini et al., 1982; Tung & Harvey, 1986; von Kitzing & Diekmann, 1987; Bhattacharyya & Bansal, 1988.6, 1990; Soumpasis & Tung, 1988; Yanagi e¢ al., 1991), there is essentially only one way of defining rotation matrices and translation vectors. This allows some of the issues surrounding the parameters to be analyzed from a common perspective.

Equation (1) provides the basis for analyzing the relative positions and orientations of individual bases and

base-pairs. To determine the position and orientation of

frame j with respect to frame i (and vice versa), equation (1) implies that:

which can be rewritten as: Pi = (R;'R,)p;+R; '(o;—9,).

where Ry' is the matrix inverse of R;. The above

equation can be simplified by defining:

the point considered is the same but represented in either frame i R,p, +0; = R,p;+ 9}. (pi) or frame j (pj), after applying } I : } , these transformations to the position and orientation of one base or base-pair with absolute frame, | will get the same point representation p

Therefore, by equations (6) and (7): R,;,= Ri, and oj = —Rj,0;;- (8)

Equation (8) provides the connection between the relative positions and orientations of 2 coordinate frames as seen from the point of view of each. Given that we have already determined the translation vector 0,; and rotation matrix R,;, that define the position and orientation of frame j as seen from frame 7, we can use equation (8) to determine the translation vector 0, and rotation matrix R,; that define the position and orientation of frame 7 from the point of view of frame j.

(e) Calculating neighboring and complementary base-pair parameters

Equation (3) provides a direct means of analyzing the

respect to another in terms of matrices and vectors. However, the EMBO guidelines require that the relative positions and orientations be described in terms of rotational and translational parameters. Figure 6 shows the Cartesian neighboring base-pair parameters defined by

R,=R;'R; and 0,,=R;'(0,-9). (2) the EMBO workshop. The 3 rotational parameters are

tilt, roll and twist, the rotations about the X, Y and

his is the t Then: , Z-axes. respectively. The 3 translational parameters are this is the transformation to go shifty * : . .

from the representation in frame Pp; = Rp; + 0; (3) shift, slide and rise. the translations along the X, Y and

j to the representation in frame i Z-axes, respectively, Tn our mathematical framework,

Equation (3} allows the coordinates of an atom as measured in frame i to be calculated from the coordinates as measured in frame j. As such, the equation defines the position and orientation of frame j as seen from frame i. Tn particular, the columns of the rotation matrix R;; are the X, Y and Z-unit vectors for frame j as measured in frame i. Similarly, the entries of the vector 0,; are the X, Y and Z-coordinates of the origin of frame j as measured in frame Z.

Computing the matrix inverse in equation (2) is quite straightforward because a rotation matrix has the property that its inverse is equal to its transpose (rotation matrices are a special case of orthogonal matrices that have this property (Anton, 1973)). Stated mathematieally, if R is the rotation matrix:

ey Yx 2 R=/% % % |. wt, Y. 2, then: Hy Ly a, RU=R=/y wy y |- (4) zy ty

Using equation (4), equation (2) simplifies to:

R, = RR; and 0;;= Ri(o;—9,). (5)

Equations (3) and (5) together tell us how to calculate the position and orientation of coordinate frame j as seen from frame 7. However, the question also arises as to how frame ? appears from the point of view of frame j. This can be determined by interchanging i and j in equations (3) and (5). Then:

p; = Rypito,. (6)

By rearranging equation (3) and using equation (4), it also follows that:

Pj = Rj '(p;—9;,) = RiP; — Rj,0;;. (7)

these parameters are calculated from the matrices and vectors that appear in equation (3). The tilt, roll and twist rotational parameters for a pair of neighboring bases or base-pairs ? and j are calculated from the rotation matrix R,;, and the shift, slide and rise translational parameters are calculated from the translation vector 0,,. Likewise, in the case of the local helical parameters for bases or basepairs ¢ and j, inclination, tip and helical twist are caleulated from R;; and the dx, dy and dz displacements are calculated from 0,;. For complementary bases 7 and j in a base-pair, the buckle, propeller twist and opening parameters are calculated from R,;, and the shear, stretch and stagger parameters are calculated from 0;;.

Although the calculation of the rotational parameters requires the introduction of additional mathematics, the translational parameters can be defined and calculated directly in terms of rotation matrices and translation vectors. The calculation of the translational parameters will therefore be considered first, beginning with the parameters for complementary bases in a base-pair.

yz

Neighboring

Base Pair Parameters

x Minor Groove Strand I Strand 2 Tile (4) Roll (p) Twist (£2) i | Slide (Dy) : Shift Dx) Rise (Dz)

Figure 6. The Cartesian neighboring base-pair parameters defined by the 1988 EMBO workshop.

[Page 8]

132 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Siructure Parameters

(f) Defining and calculating the base-pair coordinate frame, shear, stretch and stagger

One thing that is immediately clear from equation (8) is that the X, Y and Z-components of the translation vectors 0;; cannot themselves be used as the values for either the complementary shear, stretch and stagger parameters or the neighboring shift, slide and rise parameters. The EMBO guidelines require that the magnitudes of these parameters be independent of the direction in which they are measured. Equation (8) clearly shows that this property does not hold for 0,; because the value of the reverse translation 0,; depends on the rotation matrix R;;. Measuring the translation in the opposite direction therefore causes the magnitudes of the X, Y and Z-translations to change depending on the amount of rotation between coordinate frames i and j. A more sophisticated approach than simply using the 0,, translation vectors is thus needed to calculate the neighboring and complementary translational parameters.

In the case of complementary base-pairs, the definition of the translational parameters is intimately tied to the calculation of the base-pair coordinate frame. Our mathematical definition of the position and orientation of the base-pair frame coincides with the pictorial definitions that appear in the EMBO guidelines and are reproduced in Figure 7. In this Figure, the base-pair frame is depicted as being midway between the 2 bases in both the translational and the rotational senses. From the point of view of the base-pair coordinate frame, the position and orientation of one base frame is exactly opposite that of the other base frame. Our approach is essentially the mathematical embodiment of this concept. The base-pair coordinate frame is defined to be the half-way rotated and translated coordinate frame between the 2 bases, The position and orientation of one complementary base is equal and opposite to that of the other complementary base when viewed from the base-pair coordinate frame, just as suggested by the diagrams. Each base is translated away from the base-pair frame by half the shear, stretch and stagger, and each base is rotated away from the basepair frame by half the buckle, propeller twist and opening.

(g) Relating single base coordinate frames to the base-pair frame

In addition to using rotational and translational symmetry to define the base-pair coordinate frame, 2

Base Pair Parameters

3 Complementary fy 5

BASE 1 BASE2

uU—_,—-_—__Y"

Minor Groove

Buckte (x) Propeller Twist (@)

Stretch (Sy)

Shear (Sx) Stagger (Sz)

Figure 7. The Cartesian complementary base-pair parameters defined by the 1988 EMBO workshop. These parameters relate the rotational and translational orientations of one base to its complementary base in a base-pair.

ci

¥2 ci’

22

Figure 8. Base coordinate frames between complemen-

tary residues in an ideal antiparallel double-stranded DNA.

other considerations are incorporated into our approach. The first consideration reconciles the fact that the X, Y and Z-directions of a base-pair frame change depending on which strand of a DNA molecule one takes to be the primary strand. This change arises because of the way the X, Y and Z-directions for single bases and base-pairs are defined in the EMBO guidelines.

For bases on a single chain, the guidelines cal] for the Y-axis to point toward the backbone of the strand to which the base is attached and the X-axis to point in the direction of what would be the major groove in a standard Watson-Crick base-pair. The Z-axis would then point in the 5’-to-3' direction of the strand. When fitting coordinate frames to individual bases, each base is treated as though it were on a single chain with the X, Y and Z-axes pointing in the directions described above. The result is that the coordinate frames of the bases in a basepair are “‘flipped’’ with respect to one another. In an ideal Watson-Crick pair, the coordinate frame of one base would appear as if it were rotated 180° about the X-axis with respect to the other base frame, as shown in Figure 8. Likewise, in an ideal parallel stranded structure, one base frame would appear rotated 180° about the Z-axis with respect to the other base frame, as shown in Figure 9.

For a base-pair, the EMBO guidelines call for the Y-axis of the base-pair coordinate frame to point toward the backbone of the base on the primary strand and the X-axis to point in what would be the major groove in a standard Watson-Crick base-pair. Therefore, before calculating the complementary base-pair parameters, the coordinate frame of the base on the secondary strand must first be flipped 180° about either the X or Z-axis depending on whether the DNA strands are antiparallel or

cr cr x Y2

Figure 9. Base coordinate frames between complementary residues in an ideal parallel double-stranded DNA.

[Page 9]

Mathematics for Nuclere Acid Structure Parameters 133

parallel. The relationship between the resulting coordinate frames is then measured.

Note that for the ideal base-pairings shown in Figures 8 and 9, the flipping operation would cause the X, Y and Z-axes of the 2 complementary bases to point in exactly the same directions. Since the coordinate frames would then be exactly parallel, there would be no rotation from one coordinate frame to the other (i.e. the rotation matrix would be the identity matrix). Hence, the buckle, propeller twist and opening would be zero as one would expect. On the other hand, if the coordinate frame of the secondary base were not flipped, the result would be a 180° buckle in the case of the ideal antiparallel-stranded pairing (because the complementary base would then be rotated 180° about the X-axis with respect to the primary base) and a 180° opening in the case of the ideal parallelstranded pairing (because the complementary base would then be rotated 180° about the Z-axis with respect to the primary base).

The flipping operations described above are carried out by modifying the rotation matrix of the secondary base before further calculations are performed on the basepair. For antiparallel DNA, rotating the secondary base frame 180° about its X-axis has the effect of negating the Y and Z-unit vectors of the coordinate frame while leaving the X-unit vector unchanged. Consequently, if:

x Yx zy R,= Ly Yy zy Zz ¥: a,

is the rotation matrix defining the coordinate frame of the secondary base before flipping, then the rotation matrix after flipping 180° about the X-axis is:

vy —¥x Ry R,=} s, —y, —z%, |. (9) 2 —¥ —*%

Likewise, for parallel stranded DNA, the secondary base frame is rotated 180° about its Z-axis, yielding the modified rotation matrix:

Thy Ye R,=| —-2%, yy % |- (10) —%, —~Y¥, %

The prime symbol (') is used in the subscripts of equations (9) and (10} to indicate that the corresponding coordinate frame has been flipped.

Using matrix notation, the modified matrices can be expressed in terms of flip matrices in the following way:

R, =R,F, for antiparailel stranded DNA (11a)

R,=R.F, for parallel stranded DNA, (11b) where: 1 0 96 F,=| 0 ~—! 0 (12) 0 1 -I

is the flip matrix for antiparallel stranded DNA, and:

-1 0 0 Fp=| 0 -Il 0 (13) 0 0 1

is the flip matrix for parallel stranded DNA. Note that F,F, = F>F, =I, where I is the identity matrix of order

3. Each flip matrix is therefore its own matrix inverse: Fx,’ =F, =F, and F,’ =F =F. (14)

Using flip matrices, the relationship between the flipped and non-flipped secondary base coordinate frames is given

by: P2 = Fp;, (15)

where F =F, for antiparallel DNA and F=F, for parallel stranded DNA. Note that in this equation there is no translation between the flipped and non-flipped coordinate frames. The flipping operation does not change

the origin location of a coordinate frame, rather it negates 2 of the 3 (X, Y, Z) coordinate values. Thus:

03 = 0). (16)

(h) Eliminating artifactual correlations between parameters

The second consideration incorporated into our approach addresses the pairwise statistical correlations that can arise between structural parameters, such as between rise and dbuckle (i.e. the difference in the buckle of neighboring base-pairs, also known as cup). Such statistical correlations have been reported in the literature (Bhattacharyya & Bansal, 1990; Grzeskowiak ef al., 1991; Yanagi ef al., 1991) and are thoroughly analyzed in the companion paper (Babcock & Olson, 1994). Figure 10 illustrates the correlation in the case of rise and dbuckle discussed in the companion paper. In this Figure, the white rectangles represent the bases in the actual structure, and the shaded rectangles represent the bases in their ideal base-pairing relationship after they have been rotated into position. The correlation between rise and dbuckle can be seen in Figure 10(a) and (b). In these Figures, the pictorial definition of buckle given in the

= ot

Az

co a SS

Figure 10. The effect of pivot point location on the base-pair origin. The white rectangles represent the actual base locations. The shaded rectangles represent the positions of the base-pair coordinate frames after moving the bases into their ideal pairing positions (i.e. zero buckle, propeller twist and opening). (a and b) If the base pivot points are located at the base origins, there is a significant correlation between dbuckte and rise. (c and d) If the base pivot points are positioned more toward the centers of the

bases, the correlation between dbuckle and rise is minimized.

[Page 10]

pivot point here!

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

EMBO guidelines is used to rotate the bases into their idealized planar base-pairing configuration. When successive base-pairs buckle toward each other, the rise appears to be unusually small (Figure 10{a)). When they buckle away from each other, the rise appears to be unusually large (Figure 10(b)). The result is a correlation between rise and dbuckle that can be detected statistically (Babcock & Olson, 1994).

While some correlations are real, many correlations, such as that between rise and dbuckle, are actually artifacts of the mathematics used to define the parameters. In Figure 10(a) and (b), buckle is assumed to be a symmetrical rotation of the two bases in a base-pair about the short axis of the base-pair. On the surface, this assumption seems perfectly reasonable. However, what the assumption is really saying is that when a base-pair buckles, the center of the base-pair remains more or less fixed in space, while the backbones of the 2 strands stretch and compress as needed to induce the observed buckle. The problem is that this implicit assumption is an inaccurate model of what actually happens in a structure. Although the backbones do stretch and compress when a base-pair buckles, the center of the base-pair also moves because of the base-stacking constraints imposed by the neighboring base-pairs.

A more accurate model of buckle would have the base atoms near the backbones of the 2 strands move in one direction and those near the center of the base-pair in the opposite direction (see Figure 10(c} and (d)). In this model, the bases do not necessarily rotate about the short axis of the base-pair when the base-pair buckles. Instead, the axis of rotation of each base is displaced away from the short axis. By appropriately choosing the axis of rotation of each base in the mathematics used to define the base-pair coordinate frame, the correlation between rise and dbuckle as well as those between several other pairs of parameters can be minimized or even eliminated (Babcock & Olson, 1994), We thus conclude that the correlations that can be minimized by this approach are artifacts of the mathematics.

In our approach, we have introduced the concept of a pivot point to take into account the independent axes of rotation of the 2 bases in a base-pair. The pivot point is the point about which a base rotates relative to the basepair coordinate frame when the base-pair buckles, propeller twists and/or opens. In the equations presented below, no constraint is placed on the location of the pivot point of a base. For pragmatic reasons, however, the program assumes that the position of the pivot point relative to the base atoms is the same for all bases of the same type in a nucleic acid structure. The relative position of the pivot point for each base type is specified in the same reference file used in the least-squares fitting process described earlier. The companion paper (Babcock & Olson, 1994) details the statistical analysis used to determine the locations of the optimum pivot points, which appear in the reference file that is supplied with the program. As discussed in the companion paper, the optimum location for the pivot points has been found to be on the Y-axis at a point one-third the distance from the base origin to the Y-coordinate of the C,, atom (i.e. at coordinate position [0-0, 1808, 0-0] A).

{i) The mathematical relationship between bases in a base-pair To express the mathematical relationship between a

base-pair coordinate frame and the coordinate frames of the 2 bases in the pair, it is useful to think in terms of

constructing the base-pair by starting with the bases in their ideal pairing relationship and then moving them into their actual positions. This motion can be accomplished either by first rotating the bases about their pivot points and then translating them into the final positions, or by first translating them and then rotating them about their pivot points. The same equations are obtained in both cases. For convenience, we shall start with the second case and then consider the first.

While the translation of the bases can be treated as a single operation, the rotations of the bases about their pivot points will be considered in 3 steps in order to derive the appropriate matrix equations. The reason is that, when the coordinates of an atom are multiplied by a rotation matrix, as in equations {}) and (3), the rotation takes place about the origin of the frame in which the coordinates are measured. Thus, to derive the matrix equations, we must first move the origins of the base coordinate frames to their pivot points, perform the rotations, and then move the origins back to their original positions relative to the rotated base atoms. To express the motion mathematically, let:

P, = coordinates of a given atom measured in the

base-pair coordinate frame;

P., P2, = coordinates of the atom as seen in the 2 base frames after initial translation;

Pi, Pz, = coordinates after moving the base origins to the pivot points;

Pi,: Pz, = coordinates after rotating about the pivot points;

P;, Px = final coordinates of the atom after moving the origins back into position.

As previously discussed, the base-pair coordinate frame is defined so that the position and orientation of one base is equal and opposite to that of its complement when viewed from the base-pair coordinate frame. When performing the first translation, each base therefore moves in equa] and opposite directions by half the amounts of shear, stretch and stagger. In accordance with the EMBO sign convention illustrated in Figure 7, the primary base moves in the positive direction and the secondary base moves in the negative direction. Shear, stretch and stagger thus define the total translation from the second base to the primary base. Let t,., be the shear, stretch and stagger vector. The initial translation involves no rotation; therefore, by equation (3):

Pp = Pi, tdtoy

P, = Po; — 3to1.

To express the movement of the base origins to the pivot points, let v, be the coordinates of the pivot point for the primary base and v,. be the coordinates of the pivot point for the secondary base. The coordinates of each pivot point are measured with respect to the coordinate frame of the respective base. For v,., this means

the flipped coordinate frame of the secondary base. Thus, from equation (15):

(17)

(18)

where F is the flip matrix for the secondary base (i.e. Fy or Fp in equations (12) and (13)), and v, is the position of the pivot point of the secondary base measured with respect. to its non-flipped coordinate frame. These pivot points define translation vectors from p,, to p,, and from P2, to p2,. Therefore:

Vv, = Fv,,

Pi, =Pi,tVi P2, = Pa, + V2.

(19)

[Page 11]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 135

Let R,, be the matrix defining the rotation of the primary base about its pivot point. Since the second base is rotated in the equal and opposite direction, the rotation matrix for the secondary base is R;,’. Thus:

tional parameters of buckle, propeller twist: and opening are calculated from R.., as discussed below. The second part of the equation [v,,—Rj,V, + Ry(¥y —V2-) + Ry, te] is the translation vector 02, that defines the position of the primary base as seen from the flipped coordinate

(20) frame of the secondary base. Thus: relationship between transformation from base 1 to base 2 and transformation from mid-frame to base

R,., = R2, (24a) O71, = Ve — Riv, +Ryoi(¥, —V2)+ Reitz. (24b)

Pi, = Rai Pi,

P2, = Rji'p2;.

The final step is to reverse the translation of the base origins to the pivot points so that the pivot points are

back in the former position with respect to the base

. Since R,, multiplied by itself is equal to R,,, Ry, can coordinate frames:

be thought of as the square-root of R,.,. This motivates

question: how do | represent the Pi, =Pi-% us to write the equation for Ry; as:

same point in the base-pair, (21) '

base 1 and base 2 frames? Po = Po —V2. R,, = (R21)'.

¥ Combining equations (17) to (21) therefore yields: As shown in Appendix B, square-roots of rotation \ matrices can be computed using the mathematics we have pb = position in base pair frame Ps = Roi (Py —V1) + Vi + 324 (22a) developed for computing buckle, propeller twist and p1 = position in base frame 1 -1 pe : santins A .

p2 = position in flipped base frame 2 Py = Ryy!{Pa-— V3.) +V2-— hte. (22b) opening. In particular, if x, @ and @ are the values of

Equation (22) is also obtained if the bases are first rotated about their pivot points and then translated into position. As before, rotating the bases about their pivot points involves first translating the base origins to the base pivot points, rotating about the pivot points, and then translating the origins back into their original positions relative to the rotated bases. This is equivalent to performing the same steps as before with the translation vector tz, set to 0. Let p,, and p., be the atom coordinates after performing the rotation about the pivot points with t,., set to 0. Then:

Pi, = Ryi(Pi-—Vi) +1 P2, = Rg (Pa —¥2) + V2".

After rotating the bases, they are then translated into position. This has the effect of adding half the shear, stretch and stagger (0-5t,.,) to the equation for p,, and substracting half the shear, stretch and stagger (—0°5¢,.1) to the equation for p2,. This again produces equation (22). Note that equation (22) makes no assumptions regarding the position of the pivot points relative to the bases. They can be arbitrary points in space and their relative positions can change from one base to the next.

(j) Calculating shear, stretch and stagger

Equation (22) provides the basis for calculating shear, stretch and stagger (ie. t,,), and for calculating the position and orientation of the base-pair coordinate frame so that equation (3) can then be used to analyze the relative positions and orientations of neighboring basepairs. The equation for shear, stretch and stagger is obtained by eliminating p, from equation (22), which yields:

P2 = Ry, Ry Pi + ; fv>—R,1Ryi¥) + Rai (¥i — V2) + Ry, to, | = R;ip,+

[v2 —Rgivi + Rgi(¥i —V2)+Roiter]. (23)

where: Rj, = Rai Rai.

Equation (23) thus defines the position and orientation of the primary base as seen from the flipped coordinate frame of the second base. From equation (3), R2, is equal to the rotation matrix R,., that defines the orientation of the primary base frame relative to the flipped coordinate

frame of the secondary base. The complementary rota-

buckle, propeller twist and opening caleulated from R,, using equations (48) to (50) given below, then x/2, w/2 and o/2 are the values of buckle, propeller twist and opening for generating R,, using equations (38) to (40) below.

The equation for R,,; can be combined with equations (5), (11) and (14) to yield:

Ry = (R,)! = (R}R,) = (FR{R,)! = (FR,,)!, (25)

where F is the flip matrix for the secondary hase (i.e. Fy, or F,) given in equations (12) and (13), and where R, and R, are the rotation matrices whose columns are the X, Y and Z-unit vectors for the coordinate frames of the primary and secondary bases, respectively. Equation (25) enables one to compute the orientation of the primary base as seen from the base-pair coordinate frame in terms of the coordinate frames of the individual bases in the base-pair.

The value of the shear, stretch, stagger vector t,, Is obtained by rearranging equation (24b) and combining it with equations (5), (11), (14), (18) and (25). Equations (5), (11) and (14) imply:

027, = Fo,, and Ry, = FR. (26) Combining equations (24b), (25) and (26) yields: to = (Roy) [O24 + Roi Vi — V2 +¥2—V1 (27a)

= (FR,,)-'Flo2,+R21¥i—V2]+Fv2—v;. (27b)

Equation (27) allows shear, stretch and stagger to be calculated from the translation vector 0,, that defines the position of the primary base as seen from the coordinate frame of the secondary base (equation (5)), and from the rotation matrix R,, that defines the orientation of the primary base as seen from the secondary base coordinate frame.

To show that the magnitudes of shear, stretch and stagger are independent of the direction in which they are measured, let ¢,.. be the shear, stretch and stagger when the secondary base is taken to be the primary base, and vice versa. From equations (8) and (27):

ty = (Ry2) Fl0y. +Ri2v2—Vi J+ Fv, —Vv2 = (Ry-2)F[—R5,02,+Ri.¥2—vi ]+ Fv, —v, = — (Ry) FR} ,[02;—V2 + Rai vy] + Fv, —vo- From equations (8) and (26): R,.. = FR, = FR$;.

how to get mid-frame

how to get shear, stretch and

stagger from the

two base frames

[Page 12]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Therefore: ty = —(Ry-2) #Ry-2[02; —V2 + R21 V4] + Fv, —V2 = —(Ry2)!{021 V2 + Rai Vi] + Fv, —vp. From equation (44) presented below (R,.5)! = F(R2.,)'F. This result is derived using the mathematical definitions we have developed for buckle, propeller twist and opening. The derivation is therefore deferred until later. Using this result, it follows that: ty. = —F(R;,)-#F[02, —V¥2 +R21¥,]+ Fv, —v2 = —F[(Rz,)*F[02;—V2+R21V,]+V¥; —Fv)] =—Ft,,,.

For antiparallel DNA, F=F,; in which case, from equation (12):

the coordinate frame for the primary base and rotate halfway back to the flipped coordinate frame of the secondary base (equation (29a)). The second approach is to start with the flipped coordinate frame of the secondary base and rotate halfway forward to the coordinate frame of the primary base (equation (29b)}. Both approaches give the same result.

Equation (28) also defines 2 ways of calculating the base-pair origin o,. From equations (28) and (29):

Oo, = 0, +R, v,—R,fv, +4ty] = 07,+RzV2.—Ryl[V2— Ft].

A 3rd way of calculating the base-pair origin is to combine the 2 equations above with equations (11), (14), (16) and

tax 1 0 0 tone tors tio=l tay |=-lO -1 Of-ltay l= | try faz 0 0 -l bone torte For parallel stranded DNA, F = F,; in which case, from equation (13): byax ~1 0 0 taax tornty too =| tray |= O -L O f°] tony | = bony tyos 0 1 bays ston,

Thus, the magnitudes of shear, stretch and stagger remain the same when the direction of measurement changes. In the case of antiparallel DNA, the value of shear changes sign when the direction changes. The values of stretch and stagger, on the other hand, remain the same. For parallel DNA, stagger changes sign while the values of shear and stretch remain the same. In both cases, the magnitudes do not change.

(k) Calculating the position and orientation of the basepair coordinate frame

In addition to calculating shear, stretch and stagger, it is necessary also to calculate the origin vector and rotation matrix of the base-pair coordinate frame. This must be done so that the relative positions and orientations of base-pairs can be analyzed. From equations (22) and (25):

Py = (Ro) Py +V — (Ray) Lv, +324] P2 = (Rz1)'pp+¥2—(Ro1)4[¥2.—4te4]-

Therefore, from equation (1):

{18) to produce: 0, = 3(0, +07 +R, Vv, +Rz-V.—R,[v, + V2J) = $00, +0,+R,v,+R,FFv,—R[¥,+Fv2]} (30) = $0, +0,+R, Vv, +R2v2—R,|v, + Fv).

Equation (30) is less prone to accumulated round-off error and also provides insight into how the pivot points affect the position of the base-pair origin. Vectors 0, and 0, are the absolute positions of the origins of the complementary bases in the base-pair; R,v, and R,v, are the absolute positions of the base pivot points (i.e. as measured in the absolute coordinate frame rather than the individual hase coordinate frames); R,v, and R,Fv, are the absolute positions of the base pivot points after the bases have been rotated and translated into their ideal pairing positions in the base-pair coordinate frame. The differences between R,v, and R,v,, and between R,v, and R,Fv, are therefore the amounts by which the absolute pivot point locations are offset from their ideal positions in an ideal pairing relationship. These offsets are added to the base origins. The origin of the base-pair is then the

how to get the origin of the mid-frame

key point

transformation to P = (R,(Rz1)7)py t+ midpoint between the offset base origins.

how to get the midframe orientation

Because both equations describe the same relationship between the base-pair coordinate frame and the absolute frame, it follows that the rotations and translations in the equations must be the same. Therefore, from equations (1), (11), (25) and (28), the rotation matrix R, whose columns are the X, ¥ and Z-unit vectors of the base-pair frame is given by:

R, = R,(Rz,)? = R,(FR,,)7? (29a) =R,(R,,)! = R,F(FR,,)!. (29b)

There are thus 2 ways of calculating the X, Y and Z-unit vectors for the base-pair origin. The first is to start with

go from mid- (0,+R,Vv,—R, (Ry) fv, +4t24]) (28a) frame to absolute m representation p = (R,(R,.,)')p,+ . . . . - 2 *(Op+ Ry¥y—Ro(Ry}![¥p- —4t,.,]). (28b) (1) Defining and calculating shift, slide and rise

As discussed earlier, the EMBO guidelines require that the magnitudes of all rotational and translational parameters be independent of the direction in which they are measured; however, the translation vector 0;; defined in equations (3) and (5) does not have this property. This makes the X, Y and Z-components of 0,,; unsuitable as a definition of the shift, slide and rise between 2 bases or base-pairs ¢ and j. The EMBO guidelines suggest measuring shift, slide and rise with respect to a midway coordinate frame as one means of achieving the magnitude property. This is the approach that we have adopted. However, unlike other approaches in which the midway frame is defined in terms of averaging X, Y and

motivation for doing things complicated

[Page 13]

much simpler

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 137

Z-axis vectors, we define our midway frames in much the same manner as we have done for base-pair coordinate frames.

As was done for shear, stretch and stagger in the case of base-pairs, shift, slide and rise are also measured with respect to a halfway rotated and translated coordinate frame. In this case, however, we are not dealing with paired bases and so there is no need to flip one of the coordinate frames. The equations that define the midway coordinate frame are generalizations of equation (22). For 2 coordinate frames 7 and j:

P,. = (R,,)*(P;—v,) t+v,+ 3ti (31a) Pm = (Ry) (Pi —-¥i) + V;— 4by. (31b)

where ¢;; is the shift, slide, rise vector from frame 7 to frame j, and where v; and v; are the pivot points for frames i and j, respectively. When dealing with single bases, the pivots points v; and v, are the same as those used when calculating the complementary base-pair translations {shear, stretch and stagger). When dealing with base-pairs, the base-pair origins are taken to be the pivot points. Thus, for base-pair to base-pair transitions, v,; = ¥; = 9 in equation (31). Note that equation (31) is identical with equation (22) when i is taken to be the flipped coordinate frame of the secondary base in a basepair and j is taken to be the (unflipped) coordinate frame of the primary base.

The equation for calculating the shift, slide, rise vector is derived in a manner identical with that for the shear,

stretch, stagger vector. From equation (31), it follows that:

p; = R,p;+[¥,-Riyvj+ (R,;)'(v;—-v,) + (R,,)'t,;}. (32) Therefore, from equation (3):

0); = V;-Ry¥j+ (R;;)*(vj;—v,) + (R,,)*t,j- Rearranging the above equation results in the following equation for the shift, slide, rise vector:

t,, = (R,,)[o,, + R,,vj;—vi]+¥;—V).

if (33) This equation is identical with equation (27a) for the shear, stretch, stagger vector when 7 is taken to be the flipped coordinate frame of the secondary base in a basepair and j is taken to be the (unflipped) coordinate frame of the primary base.

Because there is no flipping of coordinate frames, it is easier to verify that the magnitudes of shift, slide and rise are independent of the direction of measurement than it is for shear, stretch and stagger. From equations (4), (8) and (33):

ty = (Ry)~ fo, +Ryv;—v,J+ Vj—V; = [(R,)7'}- (Ri) '0,,4+ (Ry) Vi - V+ V;-V; = —(R,,)~40,,4+ (Ri) 4v,- (RV; +-¥;-V; =~ (R,,)"{o,,—vi+ R,;¥;]—(¥;—V,)

as

—ty).

Thus, the effect of measuring shift, slide and rise in the reverse direction is to change the signs of shift, slide and rise without changing the magnitudes. The definition of shift, slide and rise given in equation (33) therefore satisfies the magnitude property required by the EMBO guidelines.

(m) Defining tilt, roll, twist, buckle, propeller and opening

The complementary base parameters buckle, propeller twist and opening (x, @ and oa) are calculated from the

rotation matrix R,,, = FR,, in equations (23) to (25), while the neighboring base-pair parameters tilt, roll and twist (t, p and Q) are calculated from the rotation matrix R,, in equations (31) and (32). Both sets of parameters define angular rotations about the X, Y and Z-axes, respectively, and are thus calculated from rotation matrices in exactly the same way. The only difference lies in how the rotation matrices are obtained. In the case of tilt, roll and twist, the rotation matrix defines the relative orientation of one base or base-pair coordinate frame with respect to another. In the case of buckle, propeller twist and opening, the rotation matrix defines the relative orientation of the primary base in a base-pair as seen from the coordinate frame of the secondary base after the secondary frame is flipped according to whether the DNA is parallel or antiparallel stranded.

To obtain the mathematical properties required by the EMBO guidelines, we base our mathematical definitions on simultaneous rotations about the X, ¥ and Z-axes, not on sequential rotations or angles between vectors and planes as done in previous approaches (Fratini et al., 1982; von Kitzing & Diekmann, 1987; Bhattacharyya & Bansal, 1988a,b, 1990; Lavery & Sklenar, 1988, 1989; Olson et al., 1988; Soumpasis & Tung, 1988; Grzeskowiak ef al., 1991; Privé et al., 1991; Yanagi et al., 1991). The EMBO guidelines require both the complementary and the neighboring rotational parameters to have the same magnitudes independent of both the direction of measurement (5' to 3’ versus 3’ to 5’) and the choice of primary strand. Ideally, only the signs of the parameters should change when the point of view changes. It is well known that this property is not obtained when the rotational parameters are defined in terms of Euler angles or other sequential rotations. In order for the magnitudes to remain the same, the order of rotation would have to be reversed when the direction of measurement or the reference strand changes. This is unacceptable, because the mathematical definitions would then change depending on the direction of measurement or the reference strand. An alternative approach that has been considered is to define the complementary and neighboring rotational parameters in terms of angles between planes and vectors. Although such approaches satisfy the magnitude property required by the EMBO guidelines, the parameters no longer define true rotations about the X, Y and Z-axes. The origina] intuition behind the parameters is therefore sacrificed. Simultaneous rotations, on the other hand, satisfy the EMBO requirements while preserving the original intuition of true rotations about the X, Y and Z-axes.

The mathematics we employ for simultaneous rotations is derived from rigid body dynamics based on the following physical scenario. Suppose that a rigid body is simultaneously rotating about the X, FY and Z-axes at constant angular velocities of w, rad/s about the X-axis, w, rad/s about the Y-axis, and w, rad/s about the Z-axis. From rigid body dynamics (Jeffreys & Jeffreys, 1946, Bottema & Roth, 1979; Goldstein, 1981), this produces an overall rotation of the body about the origin along the vector w with X, ¥ and Z-components w,, w, and w,, respectively. The angular velocity of the body about this axis of rotation is given by the magnitude of w:

lwl = \/w2 +2 + v?.

The ability to combine simultaneous angular velocities in this way motivates us to introduce the following definitions. As illustrated in Figure 11, we interpret the tilt, roll and twist parameters (t, p and 9) and the buckle, propeller twist and opening parameters (k, w and ¢) as

(34)

[Page 14]

138 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Figure 11. The axis of rotation defined by the neighboring base-pair rotational parameters. The axis of rotation is parallel to the vector whose X, Y and Z-components are the values of tilt, roll and twist (t, p and Q), respectively. The

magnitude of the tilt-roll-twist vector (@ = \/17+p?+4+?) defines the net rotation about this axis. The physical interpretation of this definition is that the rotations are performed simultaneously about the X, Y and Z-axes at constant angular velocities w,, w, and w,, where the angular velocities are proportional to the values of tilt, roll and twist, respectively. From rigid-body dynamics (Jeffreys & Jeffreys, 1946), the resulting axis of rotation is parallel to the vector w whose X, ¥ and Z-components are w,, w, and w,. The net angular velocity is equal to the magnitude of w. Because of the proportionalities, the axis of rotation is parallel to the tilt-roll-twist vector, and the net rotation about this axis is equal to the magnitude of the tilt-roll-twist vector. For complementary base rotational parameters, the definitions are identical, except that the axis of rotation is now defined by the vector whose X, Y and Z-components are

rotation around axis u of angle phi

the values of buckle, propeller twist and opening (x, @ and a), respectively.

specifying simultaneous rotations at constant angular velocities about the X, Y and Z-axes, respectively. In the case of the neighboring base-pair parameters, the angular velocities about the X, Y and Z-axes are proportional to the values of tilt, roll and twist, where the constant of proportionality is determined by the duration ¢ of the

cos g+(1—cos g)u? R(t, p,Q) = | (1—cos p)u,u,+u, sin p

(1 —cos @)u,u,—w, sin @

rotational motion:

wv, = , wy = 4 w, = 2

Thus, from rigid body dynamics, the axis of rotation lies along the tilt-roll-twist vector, i.e. the vector whose X, Y and Z-components are the values of tilt, roll and twist. respectively.

In the discussion above, the duration of motion was introduced purely for technical reasons to apply results from rigid body dynamics. The duration factors out when we consider the overall rotation produced by the motion.

From equation (34), the overall rotation @ is given by:

o =|wlt = /r*7 +9747, (35)

The duration of motion likewise factors out, when the axis of rotation is expressed as the unit vector u obtained by normalizing the angular velocity vector w (i.e. u = w/|w}).

cos f +{1—cos y)v? (1—cos w)u,v, +2, sin

(1—cos W)v,v,—v, sin w

R(k, w, 6) =

(1—cos @)u,u,—%, SIN @ cos @ + (1 —cos wyu;

(1—cos p)u,u, tu, sin

(1 —cos Jv, 0, —v, sin p cos + (1 —cos W)v; (1 —cos W)v,e, +2, sin y

The X, ¥ and Z-components of u are then given by:

w=, wek wee (36)

9 ? 9 Equations (35) and (36) completely characterize the overall rotation that results when tilt, roll and twist

rotations are performed simultaneously and at constant angular velocities. The value of g in equation (35) defines the total amount of rotation, while the vector u in equation (36) defines the axis of rotation. The rotation matrix R(z, p, Q) that results from this definition of tilt,

roll and twist is presented in Jeffreys & Jeffreys, (1946):

(1—cos p)u,u,+%, sin @ (l—cos pjuyu,—u, sin @ |. (37) cos p+(1—cos p)u?

Definitions for the complementary base rotational parameters are obtained in the same manner, Tn this case, the angular velocities about the X, Y and Z-axes are proportional to the values of buckle, propeller twist and opening (k, w and a), respectively, and are given by:

K w

Wy =a w=

uu, =

The overall angular rotation & is therefore:

w= S/n? +m*+o? (38)

and the axis of rotation is the unit vector v with XY. Y and Z-components:

“o= B= ”, -2 (39)

ke Te pe

The rotation matrix R(x,@,o¢)} that results from this definition of buckle, propeller twist and opening is then:

(1—cos f)u,v, +v, sin Y (1—cos W)v,v,—v, sin y |. (40) cos & + (1—cos w)v2

Equations (37) and (40) are obtained from the matrix form of a well-known formula for rotating a rigid body about a unit vector by a given angie (Jeffreys & Jeffreys, 1946). Our contribution has been to provide a physical definition of the neighboring and complementary rotational parameters so that this formula can be used.

[Page 15]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 139

Simply stated, both the tilt, roll, twist parameters and the buckle, propeller twist, opening parameters are physically defined to be simultaneous rotations at constant angular velocities about the X, Y and Z-axes, respectively. The net rotation is then determined according to the physics of rigid body dynamics for constant angular velocities, which yields equations (35) to (40).

The main consequence of the above definitions is that the relative orientation of one coordinate frame with respect to another is described by a single rotation instead of 3 rotations, as is the case with Euler angles or other sequential rotation methods. The fact that a single rotation is sufficient was shown by Euler and by Chasles (1830). Because only a single rotation is involved, changing the perspective from one coordinate frame to the other simply has the effect of reversing the direction of the rotation. As a result, the definitions satisfy the EMBO requirements that the magnitudes of the rotational parameters be independent of the direction of measurement.

For the neighboring base-pair parameters, changing the direction of measurement is equivalent to transposing the rotation matrix, as shown by equation (8). From equations (35) to (37):

cos p+(1—cos @)u2

[R(t, p, Q)|' =} (1—cos g)u,u,—u, sin g

(1 —cos p)u,u,+u, sin @ = R(-1, —p, —Q)

Thus, the effect of changing the direction of measurement is to change the signs of tilt, roll and twist while leaving their magnitudes unaltered.

For the complementary base-pair parameters, changing the direction of measurement has a more complicated effect. From equations (8), (14) and (26):

R,., = FR,, = FR}, = FR{,FF = F(FR,,)'F = FR‘.,F. Likewise: Ry. = FR},F.

Thus, in reversing the direction of measurement for complementary bases, not only is the rotation matrix transposed, but it is also pre-multiplied and post-multiplied by the flip matrix (ie. Ry. = FR5,F and R,, = FR‘..F). In the case of antiparallel stranded DNA, F = F, (equation (12)). Thus:

cos + (i —cos w)v2 —(1—cos p)v,v, +0, sin Y

— (1 —cos p)v,v, —v, sin = R(—k, @, ¢).

F,[R(«, w, 0) "Fy =

(1—cos g)u,u,+u, sin @ cos Y +(1—cos g)uz (1—cos @)u,u, —u, sin @

—(1—cos pv, v, —v, sin pb cos ¥ + (L—cos we?

1—cas P)vyv,—v, sin W y x

important consequences. The first is that: R(ik, 4a, Jo) = Rix, a, a).

In other words, taking the square-root of a rotation matrix has the effect of dividing the values of buckle, propeller twist and opening for that matrix by 2. This result, demonstrated rigorously in Appendix B, allows the square-roots of the rotation matrices in equations (25) and (27) to (29) to be calculated in a straightforward manner using equations (38) to (40) above and equations (48) to (50) below.

A second consequence of our definition of buckle, propeller twist and opening is that:

F,[RGK, $@, }o))"F, = R(—3x, $a, 4a) and:

F[R(ix. 30, t0)|"Fp = R(x, 30, —30).

This follows from equations (42) and (43). Therefore, in combination with the results on the square-roots of rotation matrices given in Appendix B, this yields:

(Ry)! = F(R,,)7'F and (R>.)* = F(R, 2)" 'F,(44)

(1—cos p)u,u,—u, sin @ (1—cos p)u,u, +u, sin Pp (41) cos p+ (1—cos pu?

where F = F, in the case of antiparallel DNA and F = F, in the case of parallel stranded DNA as defined in equations (12) and (13). Equation (44) was used earlier to demonstrate that the magnitudes of shear, stretch and stagger are independent of the direction of measurement.

({n) Calculating tilt, roll, twist, buckle, propeller and opening

Equations (35) to (40) provide a means of calculating rotation matrices, given either the neighboring base-pair rotational parameters (tilt, roll and twist) or the complementary base-pair rotational parameters (buckle, propeller twist and opening) for that matrix, The equations below allow the reverse calculation to be per-

—(1—cos po, v, + v, sin b (1—cos p)v,v, tv, sin Y cos Ww + (1 —cos W)u?

In the case of parallel stranded DNA, F = F, (equation (13)). Thus:

cos + (1 —eos p)v2 (1—cos W)v,v, —v, sin p

— (1 —cos p)v,v, — vy sin Y = R(kK, w, —9).

FR(«, o, o)|'F =

For antiparallel stranded DNA, the effect of changing the direction of measurement is to change the sign of buckle, whereas for parallel stranded DNA, the sign of opening changes. In both cases, the magnitudes of buckle, propeller twist and opening remain the same.

The mathematical definitions of tilt, roll, twist, buckle, propeller twist and opening presented above have 2

(42) (l—eos W)v,v, +e, sin wy = —(1—cos w)u,v, +2, sin Y cos + (1 —cos W)v; ~(1—cos )v,v, —2, sin Y —(1—cos p)v,v, +7, sin p cos + (1—cos )u2 (43)

formed. Because the forms of the matrices in equations (37) and (40) are the same, the equations are stated in terms of the generic case in which @,, g, and gy, are the respective rotations about the X, Y and Z-axes with:

P= SO+ oy + 9: (45)

[Page 16]

140 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

and:

wa wa a =. (46) ? 9 °

The resulting rotation matrix is then:

R(,, Py, Pz) =] 721 722 723

31 32 733

where the 7,; terms are the entries in matrix R(@,, @,, @,). In the case of neighboring base-pair parameters, 9,, ?, and ¢, would be interpreted as tilt, roll and twist, respectively. In the case of complementary base-pair parameters, ~,, @, and g, would be interpreted as buckle, propeller twist and opening.

The net rotation g and the magnitudes of @,, @, and 9, can be calculated by summing the diagonal of the rotation matrix in equation (47). Because u2+u?+u? = 1, the diagonal sums to:

iy tr22+133 = 3 cos p+(1—cos g)(u2+u? +4?)

=2cosg+l. Thus: Cos @ = 3714 +722 +733—1) (48a) how to calculate tilt, roll and -1 twist from the rotation matrix @ = cos” [3 (71, +722 +733 —1))]. (48b)

Substituting equation (48a) into equation (47) for the diagonal terms 7,,, 722 and r3, of the rotation matrix

yields: w= —yt%22 4733-1 ryytrag+733—-3 w2 _ tua r22t%33—1 2 = tL 2233

Ty +722 +733-3

2_ Tirt?22—133—1 2 tt 22 33 Trytr22t+1733—-3

“u

Combining these equations with equation (46) produces:

—Tirt%22—133—1 . 49a le, 0 fra (49a) Tifa th33—1 =: 49b 9s o fatate (49)

Trit22—733—1 =@Q° , 49c lgJ=9 lr traotty323 (49)

where the value of ¢ is calculated from the diagona! terms of the rotation matrix using equation (48b).

The signs of g,, g, and g, can be determined from the signs and relative magnitudes of the off-diagonal entries in the rotation matrix. For example, equation (48b) constrains the value of @ to lie between 0° and 180°. Thus, sin g must always be non-negative. Consequently, if r3, > 23 (ie. if (1—cos p)u,u,t+u, sin @ > (1 —cos g)uyu,— u, sin g), then u, is positive, and hence, g, is positive. Otherwise, g, is negative. Moreover, if @, is positive, the sign of g, is the same as the sign of r21+7,2 (ie. 2(1—cos p)u,u,), and the sign of @, is the same as the sign of 73, +713 (i.e. 2(1—cos g)u,u,). Similarly, if p, is negative, the sign of ¢, is the opposite of r.,+7,, and the sign of y, is the opposite of 73, +713.

For reasons of numerical stability, the rules given

cos p+ (1—cos oy = | (1—cos @)u,u,+u, sin @

(1—cos p)u,u,—u, sin @

above for determining the signs of g,, g, and g, are used only when |9,| is greater than both |g,| and |g,|. Other rules are used when |g,]| or |g,| is largest in magnitude, yielding a total of 3 cases to consider. The first case

(1—cos g)u,u,—u, sing {1—cos g)u,u, +4, sin p

cos @+(1—cos pyue (1—cos @)u,u, —%, sin @ (1—cos p)ju,u,+u, sing cos p+(l—cos )u?

(47)

consists of the rules derived above. The rules for the other 2 cases are obtained by similar lines of reasoning.

Case 1: |g,| 2 |@,| and |g, if r3 > 723 then 9. = +101 if 72, +712 20 then og, = +]9,]| else g, = —|9,| if r3, +r, > 0 then gy, = +(9,| else y, = —|g,] if 73, < 723 then if 72; +712 > 0 then g, if r3; +7r,3 > 0 then g,

Case 2: |p,| > |p, and |g,| if ry, = 73, then Py = +19, if r;3 < 73, then if r,,+7r,2 20 then g, = —|g,| else gy, = +|¢,| if rz9 +723 2 O then ~, = —|g,] else g, = +|¢,]-

Case 3: |g,| > |g,| and |g,|

if 72, 2 ry. then if r3, +713 = 0 then gy, = +]g,] else o, = —|o,| if 749 +723 = O then 9, = +|¢,| else g, = —|g,|

if ry, <7 2 then 9, =—I|¢,1 if rs; +713 > 0 then p, = —|9,| else 9, = +l, if 73. +723 2 0 then g, = —|9,] else g, = +[@,|. (50)

When used together, equations (48) to (50) provide a direct means of calculating complementary and neighboring base-pair rotational parameters from the corresponding rotation matrices.

(0) Defining the local helical parameters

In addition to the Cartesian parameters discussed above, the EMBO guidelines request that helical parameters also be calculated. Instead of the rotations and translations occurring simultaneously about all 3 axes as with Cartesian parameters, the helical rotations and translations are uncoupled and occur only about the Z-helical axis. To define the local helical inclination, tip and helical twist angles, and the X, Y and Z-displacements, we take advantage of a theorem of Chasles (1830) that has been elegantly presented by Ball

(1900). Bottema & Roth (1979} and Phillips (1984, 1990) provide more contemporary presentations of Chasles’ theorem and its implications. According to Chasles, “one can always transport a free rigid body from one position and orientation to another position and orientation by a single continuous motion along a unique axis of rotation” (translated by the authors from the original French). The motion that Chasles describes is, in fact, a helical motion about a unique helical axis. The motion can be envisioned

[Page 17]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 141

as a clock pendulum with the fulerum allowed to slide along a support rod while the pendulum swings perpendicular to the support. Tn the physics literature, the terms screw motion and screw axis are used.

As pointed out by Goldstein (1980), a weaker form of Chasles’ theorem is typically used in classical mechanics: namely, that any displacement of a rigid body can be accomplished by a single rotation and a single translation. Tn this weaker form, the location of the axis of rotation can be shifted arbitrarily, requiring only that the direction and extent of the translation be changed appropriately. The stronger form of Chasles’ theorem goes a step further, stating that of all possible positions for the axis of rotation, there is a unique position for which the resulting translation is in the same direction as the axis of rotation. With regard to the use of the stronger theorem in classical mechanics, Goldstein (1981, footnote, p. 163) comments that ‘‘there seems to be little present use for this version of Chasles’ theorem, nor for the elaborate mathematics of screw motion as developed in the nineteeth century.’ While this remark may be true for classical mechanics, it is certainly not true for nucleic acid structure analysis. In particular, because Chasles’ stronger theorem implies that there is a unique helical axis for each pair of coordinate frames, his stronger theorem provides an elegant and rigorous basis for defining local helical parameters that meet the requirements of the EMBO guidelines,

Chasles’ stronger theorem can be understood by first considering the 2-dimensional case in which the rotation and translation are performed in the same plane, and then generalizing to 3 dimensions in which the rotation and translation take place in different planes. Consider the rigid body shown in Figure 12(a), which is rotated about

(b)

Figure 12. Chasles’ theorem in 2 dimensions (geometric construction courtesy of S. Kicha Ganapathy, personal communication). (a) Rotating a rigid body about point A through an angle Q, and then translating it to point B is equivalent to (b) rotating about point D without any translation. Point C is the midpuint between A and B. Line segment CD is perpendicular to AB and angle ADB is equal to the angle of rotation Q,. By construction, angle ADC is half the angle of rotation, making the length of CD equal to half the translation distance times the cotangent of half the rotation angle: (CD] = 0-:4|AB}cot(Q,/2).

point A through an angle Q, and then translated in the plane of rotation so that point A now coincides with point B. Because the rotation and translation are in the same plane, Chasles’ theorem implies that the overall motion can be accomplished by means of a single rotation without any translation about a unique point D. This point can be determined by means of the geometric construction shown in Figure 12(b).

In the 3-dimensional case, the translation is not performed in the plane of rotation. In this case, Chasles’ theorem says that the same overall rotation and translation can be performed by means of a screw motion along a unique helical axis where both the rotation and the translation take place along the helical axis. Consider Figure 13. A rigid body is rotated about the axis AA’ through an angle Q, and then translated along a different axis AB’ so that point A now coincides with point B’. Chasles’ theorem says that the same overall motion can be accomplished by means of a rotation about and translation along a unique helical axis DD’ that is parallel to the AA‘ axis but displaced away from it. The position of the helical axis and the magnitudes of helical twist and

Figure 13. Chasles’ theorem in 3 dimensions (geometric construction courtesy of 8. Kicha Ganapathy, personal communication). Figure 12 can be viewed in 3 dimensions by changing the viewpoint of the observer. By looking from the side, instead of the top, Chasles’ theorem in 3 dimensions is obtained. The rigid body ts rotated about point A through an angle Q, and then translated along AB’ to point B’. Vector AA’ defines the axis of rotation. The X, ¥ and Z-components of AA’ are the values of tilt, roll and twist, respectively. The angle of rotation Q, (helical twist) is equal to the magnitude of AA’. Vector AB’ is the translation vector. The same overall motion obtained by first rotating about AA’ and then translating along AB’ to B’ can be accomplished by rotating and translating the rigid body along vector DD’. Vector DD’ is the helical axis vector and is parallel to AA’. Point D defines the position of the helical axis at the point of intersection with the plane of rotation. Point D is determined by first dropping a perpendicular from point B’ onto the plane of rotation to obtain vector AB and then proceeding with the same construction as in Figure 12. Vector BB’ is then parallel to the helical axis and its magnitude is the amount of translation along the helical axis (i.e. helical rise). Veetor BB’ is obtained by subtracting vector AB from vector AB’.

[Page 18]

142 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

helical rise can be determined by reducing the 3-dimensional case to the 2-dimensional case using the geometric construction shown in Figure 13.

From the above discussion, it should be clear that helical twist and Cartesian twist are not the same. With the Cartesian parameters, the total amount of rotational motion is distributed among the tilt, roll and twist parameters, with the total amount of rotation given by equation (35). In the case of the helical parameters, the total amount of rotational motion is precisely the helical twist. From equation (35) and Figure 11, the relationship between helical twist and Cartesian tilt, roll and twist is therefore given by:

QO? = 174+ p? +07. (51)

One consequence of equation (51) is that helical twist and Cartesian twist have the same physical meaning only when tilt and roll are zero, as would be the case in an ideal B-DNA structure. However, if either tilt or roll is nonzero, the physical meanings of helical twist and Cartesian twist are different. Because of this difference, the subseript A is used to distinguish helical twist (Q,) from Cartesian twist (Q). The EMBO guidelines do not make this distinction. However, it is clear from the above discussion that Cartesian twist (rotation about the Z-axis of a coordinate frame) and helical twist (rotation about a unique screw axis) are 2 entirely different concepts that must therefore be distinguished.

In addition to helical twist and helical rise, the position and orientation of the helical axis must be described in order to define fully the relationship between 2 coordinate frames using helical parameters. The EMBO guidelines call for the position and orientation of the helical axis to be expressed relative to a base or base-pair in terms of 2 rotations about the X and ¥Y-axes (inclination and tip) and 2 translations along the X and Y-axes (da dispiacement and dy displacement) as shown in Figure 14. These rotations and translations define the position and orientation of the base or base-pair coordinate frame as seen from the helical coordinate frame. The motion from one base or base-pair to the next is then expressed as a rotation (helical twist} and a translation (helical rise) along the helical axis.

Figure 15 illustrates more precisely how the 6 local helical parameters define the position and orientation of one coordinate frame j as seen from another coordinate frame i. Frames t and j both have corresponding helical coordinate frames hi and hj whoze Z-axes lie along the local helical axis. The X and Y displacements (dz and dy)

Tip (6) Inclination (N) Helical Twist (} ) X displacement (dx) Y displacement (dy) Z displacement (dz)

Local Helica! Parameters

Figure 14, The local helical parameters relating neighboring base-pairs defined by the 1988 EMBO workshop. The Z displacement (dz) is also called helical rise.

hi 8

Figure 15. Geometrical meanings of the helical parameters that define the position and orientation of coordinate frame j as seen from coordinate frame i. X displacement (dx), Y displacement (dy), inclination (4) and tip (8) define the positions and orientations of frames z and j as seen from their respective helical coordinate frames hi and hj. Helical rise or Z displacement (dz), and helical twist (Q,) define the position and orientation of helical frame hj as seen from helical frame hi.

are the X and Y positions of frames 7 and 7 as seen from their corresponding helical frames Ai and hj. Similarly, inclination (4) and tip (0) are the angles that frames i and j are rotated about their X and Y-axes with respect to the corresponding helical frames. These 4 parameters completely define the relationships between frames 7 and 7 and the corresponding helical coordinate frames. The remaining 2 parameters complete the picture by defining the relationship between the helical frames. Helical twist Q, is the amount that helical frame 4j is rotated about the helical axis as seen from helical frame Ai. Similarly, helical rise or Z displacement (dz) is the amount that, helical frame Aj is translated along the helical axis as seen from helical frame hi.

Because coordinate frames i and j have the same positions and orientations relative to the respective helical frames Ai and Aj, rotating and translating frame i about the helical axis by Q, and dz will result in frame i being superimposed on frame j. From Chasles’ theorem, we know that there is a unique helical axis that allows one coordinate frame to be superimposed on another coordinate frame by rotating and translating along the helical axis. Therefore, the geometric construction shown in Figure 15 is unique up to the choice of direction of the Z-axes of helical frames hi and hj. Because Chasles’ theorem considers a non-directional helical axis, the choice of the positive direction can be made arbitrarily. The main effect of changing the direction is to reverse the signs of helical twist and helical rise. By convention, the directions of the Z-axes of the helical frames are chosen so that helical twist and Cartesian twist have the same sign. This ensures that the values of helical twist and Cartesian twist are the same in al! special cases in which their

[Page 19]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 143

physical meanings are the same (e.g. when tilt and roll are zero as in an ideal B-DNA structure).

To derive the mathematical definitions of the helical parameters illustrated in Figure 15, consider the coordinates of an atom as seen from each of the various coordinate frames. Let:

P;, P; = coordinates of the atom as seen from the base (pair) coordinate frames i and j; Pai Paj = Coordinates of the atom in the corresponding helical frames Ai and Aj.

As discussed in the EMBO guidelines, helical twist and helical rise take place along the Z-axes of helical coordinate frames. Therefore, let:

0 dz,,=| 0 (52) dz;;

be the helical rise vector from helical frame hi to helical frame Aj, and let:

Rz,, = R(0, 0, Q4:;) (53)

be the helical twist rotation matrix. where R(0, 0, Q,;;) is given by equations (45) to (47). The relationship between the helical coordinate frames Ai and Aj can therefore be expressed as:

P,i = Rz,;p,; + 42;;. (54)

To express the relationship between the base (pair} coordinate frames i and j and the corresponding helical frames hi and fj let:

dx; dxy,,=| yi; (55) 0

be the dx, dy displacement vector and let:

Rxy,; = R(n;;. 4,;. 0) (56)

be the inclination-tip rotation matrix, where R(y,;. 0,;. 0) is given by equations (45) to (47). In equation (54), the rotations are performed about the Z-axes and, hence. the origins of the helical frames. However, in performing the inclination and tip rotations, the rotations can be performed about pivot points other than the origins of the base (pair) coordinate frames. Consequently. just as in the derivation of equation (22), inclination-tip rotations are performed by moving the origins of the base (pair) coordinate frames to their pivot points, performing the rotations, and then moving the origins back to their former positions relative to the base (pair) atoms. The relationship between the base (pair) coordinate frames

and the corresponding helical frames is therefore expressed by equations similar in form to equation (22): Pai = Rxy;,(p;—v;) + v,+ dxy;; (57a} P,j = Rxy;,(p;—v,) + v,+ dxy,;. (57b)

Here v; and v,; are the respective pivot points for base (pair) coordinate frames i and j. The pivot points are the same as those used in calculating the Cartesian shift, slide and rise parameters. Thus, in the case of single bases. v; and v, are the same pivot points as those used in caleulating base-pair origins and shear, stretch and stagger values. In the case of base-pairs, the pivot points are taken to be the base-pair origins (i.e. v, = vj = 0). Note that the forms of equations (22) and (57) are not identical.

In equations (22a) and (22b) the rotations and transjations are in opposite directions. whereas in equations (57a) and (57b) the rotations and translations are in the same direction. This is because the rigid body referred to in Chasles’ theorem maintains the same relative position and orientation with respect to the helical axis ag it rotates and translates along the helical axis, whereas the position and orientation of one base in a base-pair is equal and opposite to that of the other base when viewed from the base-pair coordinate frame.

The overall relationship between the base (pair) coordinate frames i and j is determined by combining equations (54) and (57), which yields:

p; = (Rxy},Rz,,Rxy,,)p;+ Rxy;,{ (dz, + Rz,dxy,;— dxy,;)+ (Rxy,,v;—¥,;) —Rz,,(Rxyij¥j—V,)]. (58)

Thus, by equation (3): R, = Rxy Ri

(Rz,,Rxy;; (69a)

0;; = Rxyj,[(dz,;+ Rz,,dxy,;—dxy,,) + (Rxy;;V;—v;) —Rz,(Rxy,;¥;—v,)}. (59b)

Equations (52) to (59) provide the mathematical definitions of the helical parameters of inclination, tip, helical twist, and dz, dy and dz displacements. ‘They also provide a means of calculating the rotation matrix R;, and translation vector 0,; from these parameters.

To verify the EMBO requirement that the magnitudes of the helical parameters are independent of the direction of measurement, note that equations (8) and (49a) imply:

Ry = Rxy},Rz,,Rxy ; = (Rxy/,Rz,,Rxy,,)' = (Rxy;;)'(Rz,;)(Rxy;,)' = Rxy;,Rzj,Rxy,,. Therefore.

Rxy;, = Ray, O44, 0) = Rxy;; = R(4;;, 9;;, 0).

iy

Hence, 4; = y;; and 0, = 0;;. The values of inclination and tip are therefore independent of the direction of measurement. In addition,

Rz,, = RO. 0, 9,,;) = Rzj; = R(0, 0, —Q,;;).

Hence, Q,;,;= —Qyi;- The value of helical twist thus changes sign when the direction of measurement changes, whereas the magnitude remains the same.

Similar properties hold for the dx, dy and dz displacements. From equations (8) and (59b):

0, = Rxy§{ (dz, + Rz,,dxy ,,—dxy,;)+ (RxyjV¥j;—V;) —Rz,(Rxy ,,v;—v;)]

=—Rto

1S el 83 = —Rxyj,Rz,Rxy, ,Rxyi;" [(dz;,+Rz,,dxy,;—dxy,;)+ (Rxy,;¥;—Vi) —Rz,(Rxy;;,v;—v,)]

= Rxy;,| (-— Rz;,dz;, — dxy;;+ Rzidxy;;) ~ Rz;(Rxy;;¥;—v;) + (Rxy;;v; —Vv,)]

= Rxy}[(— Rz,,dz,, + Rz,,dxy,;—dxy;;)+

(Rxy,;¥;—Vj)— Rz,(Rxy,; ¥;—Vi)]-

Therefore, dxy,;, = dxy,;, Hence, dx, = dx, and dy; =dy,;. The dx and dy displacements therefore have the same value independent of the direction of measurement.

[Page 20]

144 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

In addition:

—cos Q dz,; = —Rz,,dz;; =— R(O, 0, Qj) 2Z;, =] —sin Quit Hence, dz, = —dz;,, The value of helical rise therefore

changes sign when the direction of measurement changes, whereas its magnitude remains the same.

(p) Calculating the local helical parameters

To calculate the local helical parameters from a rotation matrix R;; and a translation vector 0;;, the definition of the local helical parameters given in equations (52) to (59) is combined with Chasles’ theorem and the definitions of tilt, roll and twist given in equations (35) to (37). From Chasles’ theorem, the helical axis is parallel to the axis of rotation defined by the rotation matrix R;; The helical twist is the amount of rotation defined by R,;. Using our definitions of tilt, roll and twist, the axis of rotation is precisely the unit vector given by equation (36) and the amount of rotation is given by equation (35). This gives rise to the relationship between helical twist and the tilt, roll and twist angles given in equation (51) which, however, does not provide any information about the sign of helical twist. As discussed earlier, the sign of helical twist is chosen to be the same as the sign of Cartesian twist. This produces the following equation for helical twist:

Q, = +J/P+p?4+O?, ifQ>0 —~J/?+p74+0?, ifA<0.

(60)

From equation (36), the orientation of the helical axis is then given by the unit vector h:

h=|hA

where:

a h p h

«oO. »~O, 7~O,

(61)

Setting g = Q, and n = h in equation (37) therefore reproduces the rotation matrix R;;. The first step in calculating the helical parameters is to calculate tilt, roll and twist from R,; using equations (48) to (50) so that equations (60) and (61) can be applied.

Inclination 4 and tip 6 define the orientation of the base or base-pair coordinate frame as seen from the helical coordinate frame. The vector h defined in equation (61) is the orientation of the helical axis as seen from the base (pair) coordinate frame. In the helical frame, the Z-axis forms the helical axis. Performing the inclination and tip rotations on h should therefore yield the unit vector k = [0, 0, 1]' that points in the Z-direction. Thus, from equation (56):

0 k=| 0 |= Ry, @, Ojh. ] Hence, from equations (4) and (48) to (47): A, cos p+ (1 —cos @)u2

A, u, Sin @

(i —cos g)u,u,

sin Obj 0 0 0 — cos O45; O}-} O J= 0 = —dz;,. where: o= /n7+0@?, u.= a uy = <. (62b)

Equations (60) to (62) provide a basis for calculating inclination and tip from tilt, roll and twist. To derive explicit expressions for inclination and tip, first note that from equations (61) and (62):

ie ugsing = TS and: . Osi a, =h, =—u,sing =— -

Therefore, inclination 4 and tip @ are given by:

PP

"Oy sing (63a) TP ne

=—- _——. 63b

9 Q, sin @ (680)

From equation (62), #, = cos g; hence, from equation (61):

oy = cos '(h,) = cos”! (a) (64)

Q,

Because the Cartesian and helical twists have the same sign, their ratio is non-negative. The total] amount of

rotation @ due to inclination and tip is therefore between 0° and 90°. To obtain an expression for sin @, note that

from equation (61): fete? fPtp?

oe Toe (Ol

and from equation (62):

She +h? = Ja sin? p+u; sin? @ ”? in r+ 474+6?

= |sin g| = |sin 9.

Because the value of @ is between 0° and 90°, sin @ is always non-negative; hence, the above equations imply

that: {24,2 vute (65)

IQs]

sin @ = |sin g| =

Combining equations (63) to (65) therefore yields the

(1—cos p)u,u, —u, sin @ 0 —u, sin @ cos p+(l—cos pur u,sing |-| 0 | = u, sing |, (62a) u, Sin @ cos @ 1 COs P

[Page 21]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 145

following expressions for inclination and tip: P -1f 2\ 2a

= ———— cos * | — |

" ft? +p? (G) Q,

g=—_1 _ -cos7! 2 I2ul

f/?+p? 2,7

Dividing the absolute value of helical twist by the helical twist produces a value of +1 for positive values of helical

twist and —1 for negative values. The above expressions for inclination 7 and tip @ therefore simplify to:

— py fQ) $41, ifQ,>0 ; 1 [72+ p? eos (=) a ifQ, < 0 (66a) @= er (By y ifQ,> 0 (66b)

J+ p? Q,/ J-1, ifQ, <0.

Equation (66) is not valid when tilt and roll are both zero or when helical twist is zero. In either case, a division by zero would occur. If helical twist is non-zero but tilt and roll are both zero, then helical twist equals Cartesian twist by equation (60), and hence by equation (61), the helical axis is parallel to the Z-axis of the base or basepair. Both tip and inclination in that case would be zero, since the rotation @ in equation (62) would have to be zero.

If helical twist is zero, both tilt and roll must be zero by equation (60). A zero helical twist means that there is no rotation as one moves from one base or base-pair to the next, there is only translation. The rotation matrix R,; in this case would be the identity matrix. By Chasles’ theorem, both the rotation and the translation must take place along the helical axis; therefore, the translation vector 0;; must define the helical axis when the rotation is zero, The dz and dy displacements are zero, and the magnitude of the dz displacement is equal to the magnitude of the translation vector. To maintain sign conventions, we define dz to be positive when the Z-component of the translation vector is positive, and negative when

the Z-component of the translation vector is negative. Thus if:

then:

i [+vatgite ifo, 20

oy (67) —./02 +02 +02. ife, < 0.

The helical axis vector h then becomes:

h, h=| h, h, where: 0 0 0 h x hy, =, h,= +. * dz dz 7 dz

Following the same derivation as for equation (66) but with this new helical axis vector, the inclination and tip are given respectively by:

ifdz> 0 ifdz <0

(68a)

y= 2 vost ( tl Jor +07 dz —1,

ifdz>0

ifde <0, {©8)

9 = — 2 - eos"! Cae /o2 + 0 dz —i,

The final case to consider is when helical twist and the X and Y-translations (0, and o,) are all zero. In this case, if dz is non-zero, the helical axis vector must point in the Z-direction, Therefore, both ny and @ are zero. If dz is zero, then there is no rotation or translation; hence, both 4 and @ are again both zero.

To summarize, if helical twist is non-zero and either tilt or roll is non-zero, then inclination and tip are calculated using equation (66). If helical twist is non-zero, but. both tilt and rol) are zero, then inclination and tip are zero. If helical twist is zero and either the X-translation or Y-translation is non-zero, then inclination, tip, and dz displacement are calculated using equations (67) and (68), and both the dz and dy displacements are zero. If helical twist and the X and Y-translations are all zero, then inclination, tip, dx and dy are zero and dz is calculated using equation (67).

Once the values of the helical rotational parameters have been determined, the translational parameters must then be calculated. If helical twist is zero, the X, Y and Z-displacements are calculated as described above. If helical twist is non-zero. the displacements must be calculated on the basis of equation (59b). It is useful first to simplify equation (59b) by combining the terms pertaining to the dx, dy and dz displacements. Dropping the 77 subscripts of the matrix entries for notational convenience leads to the expression:

dz,;+ Rz, ;dxy;;— dxy;;

0 cosQ, —sinQ, 0 dx dx =! OF +] smQ, casQ, 0 dy |—| dy dz 0 0 i 0 0 cosQ,-1 —sinQ, 90 dx

= snQ, cosQ,—1 0} +] dy 0 0 1 dz If we further define: eos Q,—-1 —sinQ, 0 H;; = snQ, cosQ,—l 0 0 0 l and dx dxyz,,= | dy |. (69) dz

then equation (59b) simplifies to:

= Rxy} {H,,dxyz,;+ (Rxyij¥;— Vi) — Rz,(Rxy,;v¥;—V,)]. (70) Solving for dxyz;; yields: dxyz;, = Hj;'[Rxy,;0,;+ Rz,,(Rxyij¥j— Vj) — (Rxy;;V;—Vi)], (73)

where: 1 —sin Q, 2 2(cos Q,— 1) H;' =| _ sin QO, _l o |: (72) 2(cos 2,—1) 2 0 0 1

[Page 22]

146 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Thus, after equations (60) and (66) are used to calculate inclination 4, tip 0 and helical twist Q, from the rotation matrix R;;, matrices Rxy,; = R(y, 0,0) and Rz;= R(O, 0, 2,) are constructed using equations (45) to (47). This allows the dx, dy and dz displacements to be calculated using equations (71) and (72) for the case in which helical twist is non-zero. Note that since matrix H,; is not a rotation matrix, its inverse is not equal to its transpose.

(q) Relative contributions of complementary base-pair parameters: buckle, propeller twist and opening

During the course of this work, it became clear that the implicit assumption that the complementary base parameters are equally divided between the 2 bases is not necessarily justified (see the EMBO diagram in Figure 7). In work to be presented elsewhere (M. 8. Babcock and W. K. Olson, unpublished results), we show that the complementary base parameters are unequally distributed. We report the relative distribution of the complementary base-pair rotational parameters (buckle, propeller twist, opening) with respect to the 2 nearest neighboring base-pair planes. The relative distributions are calculated by considering the helical axis created by the base-pairs just above and just below the base-pair of interest. The actual parameters are calculated by referencing the coordinate frame halfway between the 2 adjacent base-pairs. This gives one a Jocal context in which to measure the relative distribution of the complementary base-pair rotational parameters based upon the nearest neighbors.

To determine the relative distribution of buckle, propeller twist and opening for base-pair j, let i and & be the respective base-pairs immediately below and immediately above j. Let & be the halfway coordinate frame between i and &. The origin vectors 0; and 0, and rotation matrices R; and R, that define the coordinate frames for base-pairs ¢ and & are calculated using equations (29) and (30). R,, R,, 0; and o, are then used in equation (5) to determine the rotation matrix R, and translation vector 0;, that define the position and orientation of base-pair & as seen from base-pair 7, Equations (60), (66), (68), (71) and (72) are used to calculate the helical parameters yx, Gy, Qe, dey, dy, and dz, from Ry and 0, for moving from base-pair i to base-pair &. The interpolated coordinate frame ’ is taken to be the midpoint in the helical rotation defined by these parameters. Thus, the values of helical twist and helical rise from base-pair ¢ to coordinate frame hk are half what they are from 7 to k. The other helical parameters are the same:

Nin = Nik> Oi, = Fx, dx, = daz, dyin = LY, These parameters are used in equations (53), (56), (59), (69) and (70) to calculate the rotation matrix R,;, and translation vector 0,, that define the position and orientation of coordinate frame # as seen from base-pair i. The absolute origin 0, and the X, Y and Z-axis vectors R, of

frame h are calculated from R, and o,, by rearranging equation (5): R,=R,R, and o, = R,0,,+0;.

Let 1 and 2 be the primary and secondary bases of the base-pair 7. Let R,,, and R,, be the rotation matrices from the flipped coordinate frame of the secondary base to the interpolated frame k, and from the interpolated

frame to the primary base frame. R,,, and R,, are calculated using equations (5) and (11) to (14):

R,, =FRSR, and R,, =RiR,.

=—l Qu ~ Quiz:

dai, = Adzy.

The values of buckle, propeller twist and opening for bases 1 and 2 relative to the interpolated coordinate frame h are calculated from R,, and R,,,, respectively, using equations (38) to (40).

Let S,, and s,,; be the relative shear, stretch and stagger measured from the flipped secondary frame to the interpolated frame and from the interpolated frame to the primary base frame. Then the relationship between the interpolated frame and the 2 base frames is given by the following modified version of equation (22):

Pa = Ras (Pi —¥:) + V1 +8a1 (73a) Pr = Roy(Da-— Vz)) + V2 +824. (73b) From equation (73a): Pr = Rar Pi t(Sh1 +¥, —Rai Vy ]- Therefore, from equation (3): On = [S41 V1 — Ras V1). Hence: Shr = Or +Rai vi —V1. (74) Similarly, from equation (73b): Pr = RowPo-+[824+ ¥2.—Ro7V2- Therefore, from equation (3): On = [S24 +V¥2-—RayV2I- Hence: S24 = Or_ + Ry4V2— V2. (75)

Equations (74) and (75) allow the relative shear, stretch and stagger to be calculated for bases 1 and 2 of the central base-pair j.

3. Discussion

With the increasing numbers of solved nucleic acid structures, rigorous and comparable analyses of the structures are essential. The program described here combines solid mathematics with a userfriendly interface and exceeds the requirements of the 1988 EMBO workshop. All three sets of rotations and translations required for defining the complementary base (Cartesian) and neighboring base-pair (both Cartesian and helical) parameters are calculated. Moreover, there are several unique features in the mathematics. In developing the program, mathematical concepts that match physical intuition have been found. Unlike the point of view in other algorithms, the complementary base parameters and Cartesian base-pair parameters are regarded as accomplishing the same thing. In each case, the position and orientation of one coordinate frame are defined in terms of another coordinate frame with rotations and_ translations occurring about ail three (Cartesian) axes. The same mathematics is thus used when calculating both complementary and Cartesian neighboring base parameters. In the latter case, the need for a midway coordinate frame to calculate the rotational parameters has been eliminated. The use of a midway coordinate frame is an artifact of performing rotations in a sequential fashion. The problem with sequential methods is that the magnitude of the parameters is not the same when calcu-

[Page 23]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 147

lated on one strand versus the other, or when calculated in the 5’ to 3’ direction versus the 3' to 5’ direction. In order for the magnitude of the parameters to be the same, independent of the strand or the direction of measurement, the order of axis rotations must be reversed, as discussed more fully elsewhere (Babcock & Olson, 1993). As demonstrated here, the rotations can be performed simultaneously, eliminating the need for a midway coordinate frame as well as ensuring that the magnitude of the parameters is independent of both the strand and the direction of analysis.

Another new viewpoint in our program is the recognition that, for the helical parameters of neighboring base-pairs, there is an uncoupling of rotations and translations from all three axes to only one: the helical axis. Since Cartesian neighboring base-pair parameters and helical neighboring base-pair parameters define the same _ spatial relationships, there should be a mathematical connection between the mathematics that define these two sets of parameters. The mathematics presented here demonstrate the relationship between these two sets of parameters. Other programs do not show this connection.

Because the mathematics clearly connect the helical parameters to the Cartesian parameters, it is

possible to combine the methods and calculate the relative distribution of complementary base parameters. The mathematics needed to find the midway helical coordinate frame of adjacent basepair planes is presented here. This midway helical coordinate frame is used in the program as a standard against which the parameters of the central bases are compared. The method for calculating the parameters for each base against this standard is equivalent to determining the complementary parameters and the Cartesian complementary base parameters, since two coordinate frames are compared against one another. The calculation of the relative distribution of complementary base parameters as a function of the adjacent base-pairs is unique to our program. The consequences of these calculations will be described elsewhere.

Appendix A Summary of Equations

For convenience, the equations that are derived in this paper for calculating complementary and neighboring base and base-pair parameters are summarized in Tables 1 to 7.

Table 1 Definitions common io all parameters

Oiy Origin vector of coordinate frame i

Vix Vix 2ix

Tix Vix ix

Absolute X, Y and Z-axis

vectors of coordinate frame i

Rotation matrix of coordinate frame i?

Xiy Yiy Ziy Viz Yiz iz Vix Biy Pivot point of coordinate frame 7

oO, = Xi= | %y | Yi=] Yiy |> Ze=| 4y Viz ¥iz iz

iz

R(p,, Wy We) cos & + (1 — cos pu?

y be, sin Y

(1—cos #)u,u,—u, sin p

=] (l—cos #)u,u

= _¥: yy

where 2, = a u,

{1—cos p)u,u,—u, sin ¥ cos H +(1—cos y)u?

(1 —cos P)u,u, + u, sin Y

(columns are the X, Y and Z-axis vectors)

Rotation matrix defined by simultaneous rotations about the X, Y and Z-axes

(1 —cos p)u,u, + uy, sin y (l—cos W)u,u,—u, sin py |, cos W + (1 —cos Wye?

With ty

[Page 24]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Table 2 Local complementary base parameters (antiparallel stranded DNA) Parameter Symbol Definition Buckle K tj-g: (CARAT V2 742271 and [eee Propeller twist 7) +():9° X'X2+YiYa—21"Z—1 Xy°X2—Y. Y2—Zy°2Z2—3 Opening 6 $(o)g: JER Xe Mi Ve tz "Z,—1 ~ X17 %a Yr Y2—- 21°22, -3 Shear Sx Stretch Si eo oho RiR F trete Y R{- PT) [Fo2, +FR2R, v, —Fv2]+Fv,—v, Stagger Sz Base-pair xk @® oo rotation matrix R, aR (- a :) Base-pair origin O,5 4(0, +0,+R,¥,+R,V,—R,[v, + Fv2])

g = cos *[4(K, X22 Ya—Zy“Z2— 1} = /k? +07 +0?

+(x) = +1 if |x] 2 lol, |x| = lol and y,-z, < z, "yz or || > |x], |o| > fol, Z,-x2 2 —X,°Z, and x,¥.—y,°%, $0 or |co| = [x], |e] > [o], 2, x. <—x,°Z, and x, °Y.—y,°X, > 0 or Jo} & Ik], lol = Je), X1-¥2 S —y Xz and x, °Z,—2, "kK, <0 or |o| > |x}, lol > lol, XY. > —¥1°X2 and x,°Z,—Z,"x, > 0 otherwise +(x) =—1

+(@) = +1if |x| 2 lol, |x] = lol, 1% S2,'y, and X,y,—y, "x2 <0 or Ik{ > lol, (kl > lel ¥i-Z2 >Z,¥2 and x,-y.—Y¥1°%. > 0 or foo] & |x], [col & fo}, Z, “x2 > ~—Xy°Zy

or |o| = |x|, fo] > Jol, X41 -Y2 < —y1°X, and y,°Z,+2Z,"y, <0 or |o| > ix], |o] > lel, X1"¥2 > —Y "Xz and y,°Z, +2, "x, > 0 otherwise +(w) =-—1 (Go) = +1 if fx} > fool, lx] > fol, ys 22 SZ, y2 and x,-Z,—2,'%, <0 or |x| 2 leo], |] = Io], ¥1°Z2 > Z,-¥2 and X4°Z,—2Z, "xX, > 0 or |co| > |x|, |o] > Jol, 2,°x. = —X,°Zz and y,°Z,+2,"y, <0 or |e] > |x|, fol > Jol, 2, °x2 <—X,°Z, and y,°Z,+2,"y, >0 or Jo} = [x], |o] 2 lol, X1"¥2 S —¥1-Xz otherwise +(¢) =—1

[Page 25]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Table 3 Local complementary base parameters (parallel stranded DNA) Parameter Symbol Definition Buckle K +(k)-@- SX Retr Y2~21 2241 ~ Xy Xa t¥y Y2—-Zy 2243 Propeller twist ) +(w)-@- Xi'X2— Yi Y2—21 2+) Ky X2t¥p¥2—-Z,°Z2.43 Opening o +(6):@- Ky X2t¥i Y2t2Z1 2241 ~ Ay X2b¥1' ¥2—-2,°22 43 Shear Sx Stretch S kK? _¢ t tretc iy R[ - Py _ > _ 3 [Fo,, + FR{R, v, —Fv,]+Fv,—v, Stagger Sz Base-pair K @ a rotation matrix R, RR (- yo 3 Base-pair origin % (0, +0,+R,v, +R2v;—R,[v, + Fv.]) @ = cos '[—$(x,"Xy+¥1°¥2—21 2241] = fe? +o? +0? +(x) = +1 if |x] > |oo|, [x] = Jo] and y,-z. > —z,"y2 or |e| > [x], lol = lol, z,-x, S —X,°Z, and x,-y2+y,°x, <0 or |e| > Ix], ol = lol, 2, °X. > —X,°Z, and x, -y2+y,°X, > 0 or Ja] = |x), Jot = Jo}. x,y. S ¥y°X2 and x,°2,—-2Z, "x, 20 or [o| 2 |x|, Jo] = lal, x,y, > ¥i°X_ and x,°2,—-Z, "x, <0 otherwise +(x) =—~1 +(@) = +1 if |x| > Jo, |x| > lol, y,-2. => —Z,-y, and x,y, +y,°x, <0 or |x| = lel, || = Io], y.-Z. < —Z, + ¥2 and x,-y2+y1°xX, >0 or || 2 Ix}, [| = lol, z,°x, <—x,°Z, or |o| = |x|, |e} = lal, x, -y2 S y.°X2 and y,°2,—2,y, 20 or Ja} = xl, Jo} = lool, x1 -y2 > Ya X2 and y,°2,—-2,"y2 <0 otherwise +(w) =—-1 +(o} = +1 if |x| = lot, |x| > fol, y,°z, = —z, -y, and x,°z,—z,:x, >0 or |x| = |, |x] = lol, y,°z. <—Z,-y2 and x,‘z,—Z, "x2, <0 or |eo{ = |x}, [col 2 [ol, z,-x. S—-x,'Z, and y,"z,—z,"y, 20 or |e| = |x}, |e@| > |e], z,°x. > —x,'Z, and y,"z,—Z,y, <0 or |} & Il, lof = Jel. X1-¥2 S 1 °X2 otherwise +(¢) =—1

021 = R4(0, —0) —1 0 0 F= Oo -1 0 0 0 1

[Page 26]

150 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Table 4 Local base-pair Cartesian parameters from coordinate frames i to j Parameter Symbol Definition Tilt t +(t)-|Q,]- TXT Yj F225! ~ RX TY ¥ptzZZj—-3 Roll p $(p)-|Q,)- | ARATE YTB BT Xe Xp+ye ¥j+zZ;°2;—3 Twist 2 +(Q)-|9,)° FX MF YN Yj— Fi ZI XP Xt+ yp yjpt+ZZj—3 Shift Dx Slide Dy R (- 5 _ 5 - 5) [0,,+ RIR;V;—VviJ+V;— 4; Rise Dz

[Q,| = cos7 (4x, x, ty, yj +2;°2;—1) = 1? +p? +0?

#(t) = +1 if |e| > Jol, |e] > (Q| and z;-y; > y;-z; or |p| 2 Il, je Q), x2; > zx, and y;x;+x,y;>0 or |p| > ||, tp Q), x;°Z; < zx; and y;-x;+x;y; <0 or |Q) > |t}, [Q| 2 lel. yi°x; = x;y; and z,°x,+x,°z, 20 or |[Q| > |r], |Q| > lot, yi-xj; < x;y; and z;-x;+x;-zZ; <0 otherwise +(t) I

+(e) = +1 if {| > lol, It] = [Q), zi-y; = yi-zjand y,;-x;+x,-y, 20 or [t] = lol, It] = (04, 2°¥; < y,"z, and y,;-x;+x;y; <0 or [p| = Il, lal = (QI, x;°2; > z;°x; or [Q| = [2], |Q) = lol, ¥i-x, = x;y, and Zyj;t+y,z;20 or |Q| > [t], {Q| = lpi. yi x; < x;y; and z;-y;+y,'z; < 0 otherwise +(p) =—1

VVIM

VV

VV

+(Q) = +1 if|t] = lal, lel = JQ). z,-y; > y,-z, and z;-x,+x,"z; > 0 or |t| > lol, It] > |Q\, 2;-y; < y;z, and z,-x;+x,-z; <0 or |p| > |e], lal > IQ], x;-2,; > 2;-x; and z;-y;+y;-z; 2 0 or |p| = |e], |p| = IQ), x;-Z; < 2,-x, and 2,-y,+y,-2; < 0 or [Q| > [x], {Q] = pl. yi X; = XY; otherwise +(Q) = —

0,; = Ri(o;—9;)

Table 5 Local helical parameters from coordinate frames i to j (17+ p? > 0} Parameter Symbol Definition Inclination n + (Q,)- _P_- cos! Q [2 4. p? Q, Tip 0 +(Q,) «e957! (3)

Helical twist Q, +(0,):/17 +p? +0?

X displacement dz Y displacement i | H;;*[Rxy,,0,,+ Rz,{Rxy,;¥;—Vv,) —(Rxyi;¥i— Vo]

Z displacement dz +), fQ20

+(Q,) = ,

=u) wy #Q2<0

Rxy,; = R(y, 8, 0) Rz;; = R(0, 6, Q,) 05 = Ri{o;—9,)

_l —sin Q, 0 2 2(cos 2, — 1} H5'= sin Q, 1 0 2(cos 2, —1) 2

0 0 1

[Page 27]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 151

Table 6 Local helical parameters from frames i to j (t7+p? = 0 and Q? > 0)

Parameter Symbol Definition Inclination n 0 Tip @ 0 Helical twist Q, Q

X displacement dx

Y displacement dy H;;’o

Z displacement 0;; = Ri(o;—9,)

1 —sin Q,

-= ———*— 0 2 2(cos Q,—1) Hy = sin Q, _t 0 2(cos Q,—1) 2 0 0 1

Table 7 Local helical parameters from frames i to j (t7+p?+Q? = 0) Parameter Symbol Definition Inclination " + (dz) -__9iy _- agg-! (%4) Tip (7) + (dz) - i egg-! () Helical twist Q, 0 X displacement dx 0 Y displacement dy Z displacement dz + (dz) /o2, +02, +02, t(dzy alt Hon 20 —1, ifoj. <0

Oi jx Tix Ly Xz O5=] Oy | =] Yix Ye Yiz | (0;—9))

Oijz Rix iy Biz

Appendix B This method of calculating square-roots of

Square-roots of Rotation Matrices

In equations (25) to (29) and (31) to (33), it is necessary to compute the square-roots of rotation matrices in order to calculate both the neighboring (shift, slide and rise} and the complementary (shear, stretch and stagger) translational parameters. Square-roots of rotation matrices are needed also when calculating the position and orientation of base-pair coordinate frames. Fortunately, squareroots can be computed using the mathematics we have developed for the rotational parameters. First, the tilt, roll and twist parameters for the rotation matrix are calculated using equations (48) to (50). The values of tilt, roll and twist are then divided by two and used in equations (35) to (37) to generate the square-root matrix.

rotation matrices follows from a more general property of our definitions of tilt, roll and twist. For all values of & and m, equations (35) to (37) have the property that: R(kt, kp, KQ)R(mt, mp, mQ) =Ri(k+m)r, (k+m)p, (k+m)Q). (76)

Square-roots are calculated by setting & = m = 1/2. Equation (76) can be derived as follows. Suppose that:

q = R(kt, kp, kQ)p and:

q’ = R(mt, mp, mQ)q.

[Page 28]

152 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Then to prove equation (76) we need to show that: q’' = Ri (k+m)]t, (k-+m)p, (k+m)Q]p. Let:

p= /Ptp? +07,

b= WSS US.

From equations (35), (36) and (37) we can see that q is obtained by rotating p about the unit vector u by an angle kg and q’ is obtained by rotating q about u by an angle mq. Let:

Pp, = (u-p)u (77) Pp, =p—(u'p)u (78) Piso = UXP. (79)

Then, by the vector equation for rotating a vector p about a unit vector u (Goldstein, 1981):

q = Py t+ P, cos kp + Pj 90 sin ke. (80) Let: q) = (u-q)u (81) q, =q—(u'qju (82) disco = UX. (83)

Since p, and p99 are perpendicular to u, the scalar products (u-p,) and (u’p,99) are zero. Therefore, equation (81) simplifies to: Qu = [4° (Py +P, Cos kKP+Pj 0 sin ke) Ju = (u' pu (84) = Py

and equation (82) simplifies to: Gi = Pi Cos kp + P99 sin ky. (85)

Since p, is parallel to u, the cross product (u x p,) is zero. Also, since p, is perpendicular to u, taking the cross product between p, and u effectively rotates p, by 90° about u. Thus, (ux p,) = pyoo. Likewise, taking the cross product between p99 and u adds a second 90° rotation, effectively rotating p, by 180° about u. Thus, (UxXpjo9} =—p,-. Equation (83) therefore simplifies to:

diso = UX (Py +P, cos KP+P, gq sin ke) = Pio9 cos kp—p, sin kg. (86)

By the vector equation for rotating a vector q about a unit vector u (Goldstein, 1981):

q = Gi + 1 Cos MP+q) 99 Sin m~P

= p,t (P, cos k~ + Pygq sin k~)cos me + (P99 cos kp—p, sin ke)sin mp

= Pp) +P, (cos kp cos mp —sin ke sin me) + Pioo(sin kg cos mg + cos ke sin mp). (87)

Equation (87) can be simplified by using the trigo-

nometric identities: cos(a +6) = cos a cos b—sin a sin b

sin(a +b) = sin a cos 6+ cos a sin 6, Thus:

q' = Pyt Pi Cos(k + m)M + Pyog Sin(k+ m)Q. (88)

Therefore, by the equivalence of equations (37) and the vector equation for rotating a vector p about a unit vector u (Jeffreys & Jeffreys, 1946; Goldstein, 1981):

q =Ri[(k+m)r, (k+m)p, (k+m)Q)]p, which verifies equation (76).

Appendix C Parameters Calculated from the Original 1BNA and 1TN2 Structures and from the Hybrid. - Structure Reconstructed from the Parameters

To illustrate the robustness of the analysis techniques presented in this paper, and the potential for their use in molecular modeling and structure prediction, Tables 8 to 15 present the parameter values calculated from the Drew—Dickerson dodecamer (Drew et al., 1981; designated 1BNA in the Brookhaven Data Bank) and the yeast, phenylalanine tRNA (Brown et al., 1985; designated 1TN2 in the Brookhaven Data Bank) crystal structures, as well as the parameter values calculated from a hybrid structure generated from the parameter values of different segments of the two structures. The pivot point used for the complementary base parameter calculations is on the Y-axis of the base at a point one-third the distance from the base origin to the Y-coordinate of the C,,) atom (i.e. at coordinate position [0-0, 1-808, 0-0] A).

The hybrid structure was created specifically to demonstrate that the parameter values have the same meaning from one structure to the next. Tables 8, 10, 12 and 14 summarize the neighboring base-pair and complementary base parameters for two adjacent segments of the Drew—Dickerson dodecamer. Tables 9 and 13 present the same parameters for a segment of the yeast phenylalanine tRNA, which includes a non-Watson—Crick GU base-pair. The hybrid structure was generated from these parameter values, with the tRNA inserted between the two dodecamer segments. The program was then used to analyze the resulting structure and the parameter values shown in Tables 11 and 15 were obtained. As is evident from the Tables, the parameter values obtained from the hybrid structure compare quite favorably with the values from the original structures and are within the tolerance levels expected, given that the atomic coordinates of the hybrid structure were rounded off to 0-001 A. The consistency of the parameter values demonstrates that the parameter values are indeed comparable from one structure to the next.

Parameters have been calculated for all nucleic acid crysta] structures currently available in the Nucleic Acid Database (Berman et al., 1992) and are

[Page 29]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 153

available through the database. In addition, a program has been developed (unpublished) that allows the user not only to reconstruct, but also to substitute one base for another and to rotate the

bases within the structure. The program has been implemented to run within INSIGHT IT® so that structures can be modified and _ displayed interactively.

Table 8 Base-pair to base-pair parameters for base-pairs 2 through 7 of the Drew—Dickerson dodecamer d(CGCGAATTCGCG) (Drew et al., 1981) (designated IBN A in the Brookhaven Data Bank)

Res. no. Bp Bp Tilt Roll Twist Angle Shift Slide Rise Dist 2-3 G:c C:G 1-000 —5342 36:009 5346 0-512 0-145 3534 3574 3-4 C:G G:C 3-113 8-836 26831 9-283 —0°315 0-754 3-018 3127 4-5 Gee A:T —3-285 2025 40382 3-780 —0017 0-033 3382 3382 5-6 A:T A:T — 0-809 0-327 35314 0-859 0-095 —0°363 3:309 3-330 6-7 A:T TA 2-027 —3:566 33:557 4-044 0-354 —0-701 3320 3-412

Tilt, roll, twist and the angle between base-pair planes are in degrees. Shift, slide, rise and the distance between base-pair origins are

in A.

Table 9

Base-pair to base-pair parameters for base-pairs 2 through 6 of the yeast phenylalanine tRNA (Brown et al.,

1985) (designated 1TN2 in the Brookhaven Data Bank)

Res. no. Bp Bp Tilt Roll Twist Angle Shift Slide Rise Dist 2-3 C:G G:C 4-099 13-627 28-628 14-081 0-322 — 1-249 3-241 3-489 3-4 G:C UG:GU —~4-705 8-905 30993 9948 —0:501 —1:393 3-149 3-479 4-5 UG:GU A:U 1357 7-895 31-099 T913 —0-005 —1721 3°247 3675 5-6 A:U U:A —2-424 7-285 31267 7-582 0-559 — 1-502 3°357 3720

UG denotes a guanine paired to a uridine relationship used as standard. GU denotes a uridine paired to a guanine relationship used as a standard. See the legend to Tabie 8.

Table 10 Base-pair to base-pair parameters for base-pairs 7 through 11 of the Drew—Dickerson dodecamer Res, no. Bp Bp Tilt Roll Twist Angle Shift Slide Rise Dist 7-8 T:A T:A 3-193 —0-100 35°158 3-145 —0-268 —0°225 3324 3-342 8-9 T:A C:G 0-854 —0-921 38-954 1-231 0-039 —0:105 3990 3392 9-1) CG G:C — 2-822 4-625 31-695 5-349 0:386 0-895 3-221 3-366 10-11 Gc C:G —5173 — 13-509 38-407 14-195 —1:356 0-268 3693 3-943 See the legend to Table 8. Table 11

Base-pair to base-pair parameters for the hybrid reconstruction consisting of base-pairs 2 through 6 of the Drew-Dickerson dodecamer (labeled 2B to 6B), base-pairs 2 through 6 of the yeast phenylalanine tRNA (labeled 2T to 6T') and base-pairs 7 through 11 of the Drew—Dickerson dodecamer (labeled 7B to 11B)

Res. no.

Bp Bp Tilt Roll Twist Angle Shift Slide Rise Dist

2B-38 Gc C:G 1-003 — 5347 36-006 5351 0-512 0145 3-534 3-573 3B -4B CG Gc 3111 8844 26-828 9-290 —0°314 0754 3-018 3-127 4B-5B G:C A:T —3:294 2-022 40-385 3785 —0:018 0-033 3381 3-382 5B-6B8 A:T A:T — 0-802 0°320 35°308 0-850 0-095 —0°364 3:309 3330 6B-2T A:T C:G 2-026 —3:563 33-563 4041 0-354 —0-701 3321 3412 27-37 C:G G:C 4100 13-628 28630 14-083 0-322 —1-249 3-241 3-488 3T-4T G:C UG:GU —4-707 8-904 30:995 9-949 ~—0-501 —1-393 3148 3-479 4T-5T UG:GU A:U 1-360 7-896 35-092 7914 — 0-005 — 1-722 3-247 3-675 5T-6T A:U U:A —2-431 7283 31-269 7-583 0-559 — 1-502 3-357 3-720 6T-7B UA T:A —2-419 7-281 31-271 T5717 0-559 —~ 1502 3-356 3719 7B-8B T:A T:A 3194 — 0098 35:157 3146 —0-269 — 0-225 3324 3342 8B-9B TA C:G 0843 —O918 33-951 1-223 0-039 —0:105 3390 3-392 9B 10B CG G:C —2:825 4-623 31-697 5-349 0-386 0-895 3:22} 3366 10B-11B G:C CG —5:169 — 13-521 38-405 14-204 ~ 1-356 0-267 3694 3-944

Note the consistency in values between these parameters obtained by re-analyzing the reconstruction and those from the original structures in Tables 8 to 10. See the legend to Table 8,

[Page 30]

154 Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters

Table 12 Complementary base-pair parameters for base-pairs 2 through 6 of the Drew—Dickerson dodecamer Res. no. #Ch:#Ch Base Buckle Prop Open Angle Shear Stretch Stagger Dist 2 2a:11b G:C — 4-493 — 10-925 1-804 11-812 0-118 — 0-065 0-253 0-287 3 3a:10b C:G — 7569 —4091 3-789 8-602 —0:166 — 0-052 0-220 0-280 4 4a:9b G:C 10-091 — 11-723 4-964 15-463 —0:210 — 0-234 —0-130 0-340 5 5a:8b A:T 4-754 — 18382 8-080 18°97] 0358 —0:107 0115 0-391 € 6a:7b A:P 3-336 — 20-272 11-790 20-508 —0-010 0-076 0-254 0-265

Buckle, propeller twist, opening and the angle between base planes are in degrees. Shear, stretch, stagger and the distance between base origins are in A.

Table 13 Complementary base-pair parameters for base-pairs 2 through 6 of the yeast phenylalanine tRNA Res. no. #€Ch: #Ch Base Buckle Prop Open Angle Shear Stretch Stagger Dist 2 2a:7la CG —0-951 —9:198 5-005 9-244 0642 —0143 0021 0-658 8 3a:70a GC 0341 = — 13-765 10-378 13°750 0-169 0-008 —0285 0-332 4 4a:69a UG:GU 1-466 —8486 —0-302 8611 —0-086 0-361 0-122 0391 5 5a:68a A:U 7409 = — 15-488 7-678 17-156 0053 ~-0097 —O112 0157 6 6a:67a U:A —O0811 —15-884 13-396 15-869 0173 —0-016 0-360 0-400

See the legend to Table 12.

Table 14 Complementary base-pair parameters for base-pairs 7 through 11 of the Drew—Dickerson dodecamer

Res. no. #Ch: #Ch Base Buckle Prop Open Angle Shear Stretch Stagger Dist 7 7a:6b T:A 0-781 — 19-345 14-523 19-308 (241 0-005 0-202 0-314

8 8a:5b T:A — 1-673 — 19-899 7-351 19-956 0-149 —0-090 —0°005 0-174

3 Ga:db C:.G —10-843 — 19350 5063 22173 —0-182 —0-048 0-025 0-189

10 10a:3b G:C 2-376 —6258 5-490 6 691 0-245 — 0-090 0-315 0-409

11 Lla:2b C:G —3-988 — 19-750 —0-123 20-149 —0-074 —0-091 0-656 0-666

See the legend to Table 12.

Table 15 Complementary base-pair parameters for the hybrid reconstruction consisting of base-pairs 2 through 6 of the Drew-Dickerson dodecamer (labeled 2B to 6B), base-pairs 2 through 6 of the yeast phenylalanine tRNA (labeled 2T to 6T ), and base-pairs 7 through 11 of the Drew—Dickerson dodecamer (labeled 7B to 11B)

Res. no. #Ch: #Ch Base Buckle Prop Open Angle Shear Stretch Stagger Dist 2B ta:l5b G:C — 4495 — 10-924 1-795 11-812 0-118 —0:065 0-253 0-287 3B 2a:14b C:G — 7-566 -4101 3790 8-604 —0:166 —0-052 0-219 0-280 4B 3a:13b G:C 10-092 —11:724 4-969 15465 —0:210 —0-234 —0-130 0-341 5B 4a:12b A:T 4761 — 18-381 8-077 18-972 0358 —~0-107 0-116 0391 6B da:lib A:T 3342 — 20-269 11-798 20-506 -0-011 0-076 0-254 0-266 2T 6a:10b C:G —0°958 — 9-200 5-008 9-246 0-642 ~~ 0143 —0-020 0-658 3T 7a:9b Gc 0-346 — 13-764 10-380 13-749 0-169 0-008 — 0/285 0332 4T 8a:8b UG:GU 1-468 — 8-487 —0°308 8-613 —0-085 0361 0-123 0-391 5T 9a:7b A:U 7-416 — 15-482 7677 17-154 0-053 —0:097 —0112 0-157 6T 10a:6b U:A —0814 — 15-882 13-401 15-866 0173 —0-616 0361 0-401 7B lla:5b T:A 0-784 — 19-345 14-536 19-309 0-241 0-005 0-202 0-315 8B 12a:4b T:A — 1-670 — 19-906 7357 19-962 0-149 —0-089 — 0-005 0-174 9B 13a:3b C:G — 10-840 — 19-347 5-062 22-169 —0°181 —0-048 0-025 0-189

LOB 14a:2b GA 2°382 —6-264 5-493 6699 0-245 —0:090 0-315 0-409 LB V5a:}b CG — 3983 —19-752 —0:125 20-150 0-074 —0- 091 0-656 0666

Note the consistency in values between these parameters obtained by re-analyzing the reconstruction and those from the original structures in Tables 12 to 14. See the legend to Table 12.

[Page 31]

Mathematics for Nucleic Acid Structure Parameters 155

We thank Dr S. Kicha Ganapathy for pointing out the work of Sir R. 8. Ball on Screw Theory and for providing the geometric constructions that appear in Figures 12 and 13. We thank Dr Ken Roberts for references to the work of B. K. P. Horn on a least-squares fitting method. We thank the reviewers for the great care they took in reading this and the companion paper. Their valuable recommendations were used to clarify certain points. Finally, the analysis of data would not have been possible without the cooperation of the many crystallographers who have donated their coordinates to the public databases. Access to nucleic acid structures was through the Nucleic Acid Database at Rutgers University, funded by NSF DIR 9012772. This work was supported by USPHS research grant GM20861. M.S.B. was a predoctoral trainee supported in part by USPHS grant GM08319 and by New Jersey Cancer Commission Fellowship 88-2055-CCR. This work was taken in part from the dissertation by Marla S. Babcock written in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, Rutgers University, 1993.

Unix and VMS versions of the program developed from the maths presented in this paper can be obtained by sending electronic mail to: “MARLA@RUTCHM.RUTGERS.EDU”.

References

Anton, H. (1973). Elementary Linear Algebra, p. 296, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.

Babcock, M.S. & Olson, W. K. (1993). A new program for the analysis of nucleic acid structure: implications for nucleic acid structure interpretation. In Computation of Biomolecular Structures: Achievements, Problems, and Perspectives (Soumpasis, D. M. & Jovin, T. M., eds), pp. 65-85, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.

Babeock, M. 5. & Olson, W. K. (1994). The effect of mathematics and coordinate system on comparability and ‘‘dependencies”’ of nucleic acid structure parameters. J. Mol. Biol. 237, 98-124.

Ball, Sir R. S. (1900). Theory of Screws. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.

Berman, H. M., Olson, W. K., Beveridge, D. L., Westbrook, J., Gelbin, A., Demeny, T., Hsieh, 8.-H., Srinivasan, A. R. & Schneider, B. (1992). The nucleic acid database: a comprehensive relational database of three-dimensional structures of nucleic acids. Biophys. J. 63, 751-759.

Bernstein, F. C., Koetzle, T. F., Williams, G. J. B., Meyer, E. ¥., Brice, M. D., Rodgers, J. R., Kennard, 0., Shimanouchi, T. & Tasumi, M. (1977). The Protein Data Bank: a computer-based archival file for macromolecular structures. J. Mol. Biol. 112, 535-542.

Bhattacharyya, D. & Bansal, M. (1988a). A general procedure for generation of curved DNA molecules. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 6, 93-104.

Bhattacharyya, D. & Bansal, M. (19880). A self-consistent formulation for analysis and generation of nonuniform DNA structures. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 6, 635-653.

Bhattacharyya, D. & Bansal, M. (1990). Local variability and base sequence effects in DNA crystal structures. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 8, 539-572.

Bottema, O. & Roth, B. (1979). Theoretical Kinematics, North Holland, Amsterdam.

Brown, R. S., Dewan, J. C. & Klug, A. (1985). Crystallographic and biochemical investigation of the lead(IT) catalyzed hydrolysis of yeast phenylalanine tRNA. Biochemistry, 24, 4785-4801.

Chasles, M. (1830). Note sur les propriétés générales du systéme de deux corps semblables entre’eus et placés d’une maniére quelconque dans l’espace; et sur la déplacement fini ou infiniment petit d’un corps solide libre. Férussac, Bull. Sci. Math. 14, 321-326.

Dickerson, R. E. (1989). Definitions and nomenclature of nucleic acid structure parameters. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 6, 627-634.

Dickerson, R. E., Bansal, M., Calladine, C. R., Diekmann, S., Hunter, W. N., Kennard, O., von Kitzing, E., Lavery, R., Nelson, H. C. M., Olson, W. K., Saenger, W., Shakked, Z., Sklenar, H., Soumpasis, D. M., Tung, C.-S., Wang, A. H.-J. & Zhurkin, V. B. (1989). Definitions and nomenclature of nucleic acid structure components. Nucl. Acids Res. 17, 1797-1803.

Diekmann, S. (1988). Definitions and nomenclature of nueleic¢ acid structure parameters. J. Mol. Biol. 208, 787-791.

Diekmann, S. (1989). Definitions and nomenclature of nuclete acid structure parameters. EM BO J. 8, 1-4.

Drew, H. R., Wing, R. M., Takano, T., Broke, C., Takano, S., Itakura, K. & Dickerson, R. E. (1981). Structure of a B-DNA dodecamer: conformation and dynamics. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., U.S.A. 78, 2179-2183.

Fratini, A. V., Kopka, M. L., Drew, H. R. & Dickerson, R. E. (1982). Reversible bending and helix geometry in a B-DNA_ dodecamer: CGCGAATT,,CGCG*. Jd. Biol. Chem. 257, 14686-14707.

Goldstein, H. (1981). Classical Mechanics, 2nd edit., 2nd printing, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA.

Grzeskowiak, K., Yanagi, K., Privé, G. G. & Dickerson,

R. E. (1991). The structure of B-helical C-G-A-T-C-G-A-T-C-G_ and ~—s comparison —_ with C-C-A-A-C-G-T-T-G-G. J. Biol. Chem. 266,

8861-8883.

Horn, B. K. P. (1987). Closed-form solution of absolute orientation using unit quaternions. J. Opt. Soc. Amer. sect. A, 4, 629-642.

Jeffreys, H. & Jeffreys, B. S. (1946). Methods of Mathematical Physics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.

Lavery, R. & Sklenar H. (1988). The definition of generalized helicoidal parameters and of axis curvature for irregular nucleic acids. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 6, 63-91.

Lavery, R. & Sklenar, H. (1989). Defining the structure of irregular nucleic acids: conventions and principles. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 6, 655-667.

Olson, W. K., Srinivasan, A. R., Hao, M. & Nauss, J. L. (1988). Base sequence dependent models of DNA curvature, The geometric interdependence of complementary residues. In Structure and Expressions: DNA Bending and Curvature (Olson, W. K., Sarma, M. H., Sarma, R. H. & Sundaralingam, M., eds), pp. 225-242, Adenine Press, Guilderland, NY.

Phillips, J. (1984). Freedom in Machinery, vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. England.

Phillips. J. (1990). Freedom in Machinery, vol. 2 Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England.

Privé, G. G., Yanagi, K. & Dickerson, R. E. (1991). Structure of the B-DNA decamer C-C-A-A-C-G-T-T-G-G and comparison with the isomorphous decamers C-C-A-A-G-A-T-T-G-G and C-C-A-G-G-C-C-T-G-G. J. Mol. Biol. 217, 177-199.

Sarma, R. H. (1988). New nomenclature for nucleie acid helix parameters, Cambridge, U.K., September 14, 1988. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 6, 391-395.

Soumpasis, D. M. & Tung, C.-8. (1988). A rigorous base-

?

[Page 32]

156 Mathematics for Nuclete Acid Structure Parameters

pair oriented description of DNA _ structures. Tung, C.-S. & Harvey, S. C. (1986). Base sequence, local

J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 6, 397-420. helix, and macroscopic curvature of A-DNA and

Srinivasan, A. R. & Olson, W. K. (1988). Spatial density B-DNA. J. Biol. Chem, 261, 3700-3709. distributions for illustrating the base sequence depen- von Kitzing, E. & Diekmann, S. (1987). Molecular mechadent features of double helical DNA: computer nics calculations of dA,,‘dT,, and of the curved graphic visualization of Monte Carlo chain simula- molecule (d(GCTCGAAAAA),:-d(TTTTTCGAGC),. tions. J. Mol. Graph. 6, 126-134. Eur. Biophys. J. 15, 13-26.

Srinivasan, A. R., Torres, R., Clark, W. & Olson, W. K. Yanagi. K., Privé, G. G. & Dickerson, R. E. (1991). {1987}. Base sequence effects in double helical DNA. Analysis of local helical geometry in three B-DNA I. Potential energy estimates of local base morpho- decamers and eight dodecamers. J. Mol. Biol. 217, logy. J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 5, 459-496. 201-214.

Edited by B. Honig

(Received 25 June 1993; accepted 3 December 1993)
