[Page 1]

Active Loop Extrusion guides DNA-Protein Condensation Ryota Takaki,1 Yahor Savich,1, 2, 3 Jan Brugués,1, 2, 3, 4, ∗ and Frank Jülicher1, 3, 4, †

arXiv:2407.03109v1 [physics.bio-ph] 3 Jul 2024

Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics (MPI-CBG), Dresden, Germany Center for Systems Biology Dresden, Dresden, Germany Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany (Dated: July 4, 2024)

The spatial organization of DNA involves DNA loop extrusion and the formation of proteinDNA condensates. While the significance of each process is increasingly recognized, their interplay remains unexplored. Using molecular dynamics simulation and theory we investigate this interplay. Our findings reveal that loop extrusion can enhance the dynamics of condensation and promotes coalescence and ripening of condensates. Further, the DNA loop enables condensate formation under DNA tension and position condensates. The concurrent presence of loop extrusion and condensate formation results in the formation of distinct domains similar to TADs, an outcome not achieved by either process alone.

How cells read and process genomic information represents a fundamental question that is not fully understood. This process involves physical interactions between DNA and proteins that transduce sequence information on DNA to express genes and to organize chromatin. Loop extrusion by structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) complexes have been identified as a primary candidate of genome organisation and regulation [1–5]. Loop extrusion has been studied through both in vitro experiments [6–17] and theoretical approaches [18–25]. DNA loops are involved in the formation of Topologically Associating Domains (TADs) in chromatin. TAD boundaries are determined by the position of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) molecules on the DNA [4, 26–31]. Another key process involved in chromatin organization is the formation of biological condensates, a process similar to phase separation [32–40]. Such condensates have been suggested, for example, to play a role in bringing promoters and enhancers into physical proximity [41]. Indeed condensates have been shown to exert capillary forces which could be involved in such processes [42]. These capillary forces are of similar magnitude as forces exerted by SMC molecules during loop extrusion [42]. This raises the question of how loop extrusion and condensate formation synergize to organize chromatin. In this letter, we use simulation and theory to explore the interplay between loop extrusion and protein condensation in the spacial organization of DNA. We report that DNA loops play a pivotal role in nucleating and positioning protein-DNA co-condensates. The DNA loops not only facilitate the formation of co-condensates but also contribute to their stability under mechanical tension along DNA. We further discuss how loop extrusion and condensation contribute to the emergence of domains in chromatin contact maps, which characterize the DNA spatial organization.

∗ jan.brugues@tu-dresden.de † julicher@pks.mpg.de

Here we consider a configuration often used in biophysical studies of DNA, where a single DNA molecule is attached at both ends to a surface [7, 42] (Fig.1). We perform Langevin dynamics simulations that incorporate three distinct types of particle representing DNA segments, proteins, and SMC molecules. These particles interact according to Lennard-Jones potentials as well as FENE potentials along the DNA contour [43]. DNA-Protein and Protein-Protein interactions are attractive while the interaction among DNA segments is repulsive. DNA segments are coarse-grained by particles with 10 nm diameter, and all three particle types have the same diameter. SMC molecules can bind to the DNA strand in the region indicated in blue in Fig.1. Upon binding of an SMC molecule to a DNA segment, a two-sided loop extrusion process is initiated. The loop extrusion process terminates when the extruded DNA reaches a boundary of the blue region, mimicking the role of CTCF molecules [26, 44]. We start our simulation from randomized initial positions of proteins and DNA segments, with DNA ends fixed at a prescribed distance Lend μm. The contour length of DNA is set to Lc = 16.5 μm, corresponding to λ-DNA [42]. See Supplementary Information (SI) for simulation details. We first focus on the dynamics of condensate growth. Similar to conventional droplet kinetics, DNA-protein condensates grow through coalescence and Ostwald ripening when multiple condensates exist. Fig.2a displays the size S of the largest droplet as a function of simulation time t, averaged over three simulation trajectories. The size S is defined as the number of DNA and protein particles contained in the condensate (section IV.A in the SI). Step-wise increases of S(t) indicate coalescence events, while gradual growth corresponds to ripening. We compare simulations without loop extrusion (Fig.2a, left) to simulations with loop extrusion (Fig.2a, right) for different Lend . This comparison reveals that loop extrusion accelerates ripening but also enhances coalescence. To provide further insight into the condensate growth dynamics, we count the number of events where condensates disappear either by coalescence or by Ostwald

[Page 2]

No LE

LE

FIG. 1. (a) Initial configuration of the simulation with yellow and blue DNA particles indicating the DNA strand and SMC binding sites on DNA, respectively. Light blue particles represent proteins, and red particles SMC molecules. (b) Example of a DNA loop created by an SMC molecule. (c) Example of a Protein-DNA co-condensate. (a)-(c) are independent simulations for Lend = 6 μm.

ripening, see Fig.2b. We find a systematic increase of condensate coalescence events in the presence of loop extrusion as compared to the absence of loop extrusion. Furthermore we observe that droplet disappearance by ripening is strongly enhanced for large Lend . The enhancement of Ostwalt ripening by loop extrusion can be understood as follows: condensates outside the loop are subjected to the tension of the polymer and therefore disfavored as compared to the condensate inside the loop which is not subject to tension (section II in the SI). We next calculated the probability of condensate formation (Pcond ), defined as the probability of condensate formation in the final frame of our simulation trajectories (Fig. 2c). For short Lend , a condensate is present irrespective of whether a loop was extruded. For larger Lend the probability to find a condensate drops and eventually vanishes if no loop is extruded, similar to previous results [42]. Interestingly, loop extrusion enables condensate formation even at large Lend . Loop extrusion can also position condensates. In fact, in our simulations, condensates are often found where the loop is formed. To quantify this co-localization, we compute in Fig.2d the fraction of SMC-binding DNA segments (blue in Fig.1) within the condensate. With loop extrusion, these segments are largely included inside the condensate, even for larger values of Lend . In contrast, without loop extrusion,

FIG. 2. (a) Size of the largest condensates S(t) as a function of time t. Here τ is the unit-time in our simulation (SI). The color bars represent the DNA end-to-end distance, Lend . Results without loop extrusion (No LE) and with loop extrusion (LE) are shown. (b) Number of condensate disappearance events due to droplet coalescence (left) or disassembly during ripening (right). Lines represent scenarios without loop extrusion (blue) and with loop extrusion (red). (c) Probability of condensate presence in the final frame of the simulation. (d) Fraction of SMC-binding DNA segments (blue in Fig.1) within the condensate. Error bars indicate the standard error across three simulations with same parameter values.

this fraction decreases with increasing Lend . The positioning of condensates by loop extrusion can be discussed by considering three possible scenarios. In scenario (a), the DNA loop is located outside of the condensate (Fig.3a). In the scenario (b), the condensate is located at the DNA loop and only the DNA loop is inside the condensate (Fig.3b). Finally in scenario (c) the DNA loop is inside the condensate together with additional DNA segments of length δ (Fig.3c). Our simulations suggest that condensation within the DNA loop is not affected by mechanical tension. Therefore condensates form reliably in the scenario (b) and (c) containing the loop. To understand the effect of DNA loop on the formation of condensates, we use a simple model of cocondensation [42]. In this model, the free energy of the configuration is the sum, F = Fd + Fp , where 3α 2/3 2/3 Fd (Ld ) = −vαLd + γ4π Ld , 4π is the free energy of the condensate and

kB T L2end Fp (Ld , Lend , Lc ) = + 4lp Lc − Ld − Lend Lc − Ld is the free energy of the non-condensed DNA. Here Ld is the length of the DNA segments inside the condensate, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T represents the

[Page 3]

temperature, and lp is the persistence length of DNA. The parameters α, γ, and v are the inverse of the DNA packing density, surface tension of the condensate, and condensation free energy per volume, respectively [42]. Below we use parameters values obtained for forkhead box protein A1 [42]: α = 0.04 μm2 , γ = 0.04 pN μm−1 , v = 2.6 pN μm−2 and lp = 50 nm. We first consider scenario (a) (Fig.3a). In this case the condensate is located outside the DNA loop of length LA . We define the energy difference ∆Fa = Fd (Ld ) + Fp (Ld , Lend , Lc − LA ) − Fp (0, Lend , Lc − LA ) as the difference of the free energy before and after condensate formation, where we have taken into account that the DNA contour length Lc is effectively reduced by the loop length LA . The stable condensate size is then obtained by minimizing ∆Fa with respect to Ld . In scenario (b), the condensate contains the DNA length Ld = LA and the free energy change due to condensate formation is simply given by ∆Fb = Fd (LA ). Correspondingly, in scenario (c), we define ∆Fc = Fd (LA + δ) + Fp (LA + δ, Lend , Lc ) − Fp (LA , Lend , Lc ). When δ = 0, the DNA length inside the condensate equals to the loop length LA , reducing this case to scenario (b). We show ∆Fa in Fig.3d, as well as ∆Fb for Lend = 5 μm. Increasing the loop length LA shifts the minimum position of ∆Fa towards smaller values of Ld until the condensate vanishes via a first-order phase transition, similar to the one reported previously [42]. Fig.3d reveals that ∆Fb < ∆Fa , implying that a condensate will always form inside the loop, irrespective of the tension on the DNA. Thus, the DNA loop guides condensate formation. Fig.3e, shows the conditional probability of generating a condensate outside the loop (Pa ) as a function of Lend . Increasing LA shifts the curves for Pa towards smaller Lend values: the tension induced by the DNA loop narrows the range where condensation outside the loop is possible. However condensates in the loop are always favored (Pb = 1). Fig.3f shows the free energy profile ∆Fc as a function of δ together with ∆Fb . This shows that for sufficiently large Lend the free energy is minimal for δ = 0 and the condensate size is equal to the loop size. We call this loop limited condensate. As Lend is decreased below the critical value Lcend , Fc exhibits a minimum at δ > 0 corresponding to a condensate containing a DNA segment that is longer than the loop. In this regime the condensate is tension limited. At Lend = Lcend where δ vanishes, a continuous second order transition occurs. Fig.3g shows the phase diagram for condensates in the presence of a loop. In the blue region, δ = 0 and condensates are loop limited. In the red region, δ > 0 and condensates are tension limited. Both regions meet at a second order transition line. We now discuss the effects of loops on DNA conformations inside the condensates. Both condensation and loop extrusion lead to a local accumulation of DNA segments, see Fig. 1. Such accumulation fosters contacts

ΔFa

Pb

ΔFb

Pa

ΔFc

Loop limited

ΔFb

Tension limited

δ>0

δ=0

FIG. 3. (a)-(c) Schematic representations of three scenarios of protein-DNA co-condensation. Yellow, blue, and red circle indicates DNA segments, condensate, and SMC protein, respectively. (a) Condensate positioned outside the DNA loop. (b) Condensates at the DNA loop. (c) Condensate at the loop, including extra DNA length δ (green). (d) Free energy, ∆Fa , for scenario (a) compared to ∆Fb corresponding to (b), as a function of the length Ld within the condensate for different loop length LA . (e) Probability Pa (Pb ) of condensation formation for scenario (a) (scenario (b)) as a function of Lend . (f) Free energy ∆Fc for scenario (c) as a function of δ compared to ∆Fb for different Lend . (g) Phase diagram of condensation in the presence of DNA loop as a function of LA and Lend . The loop limited regime (blue) and the tension limited regime (red) are indicated. The hatched region is physically inaccessible.

between DNA segments, even when they are at a distance along the sequence. The probabilities of such contacts are characterized by a contact map, a key tool to understand chromatin organization [45–49]. We determine contact maps for different end-to-end distance in our simulations. Fig.4 presents examples of contact maps with contact probability between two segments i and j, where i and j are the DNA particle indices of two DNA segments. In Fig. 4, contact maps are shown for DNAprotein co-condensation without loop extrusion (left column), for loop extrusion without condensation (middle column), and for both condensation and loop extrusion (right column), for different values of Lend . We find that if only condensation happens, contact maps show many but irregularly positioned disordered contacts for short Lend . These contacts disappear as Lend is increased and condensates dissolve. For only loop extrusion, contacts occur within the loop and are dominated by short-ranged contacts. When condensation and loop extrusion are combined, square patterns of contacts resembling TADs

[Page 4]

emerge. These square patterns imply that contacts over longer distances along the chain are prominent. To further characterise the structures generated by condensation and loop extrusion, we consider the polymeric configuration of loops and condensates. Fig.5a shows example configurations obtained in simulations: a DNA loop without condensation (left) and a DNA loop within a condensate (right). This reveals a coil-like structure of the DNA loop and a densely packed DNA within the condensate. Fig.5b shows, the radius of gyration (Rg ) of the DNA loop as a function of loop length, exhibiting a scaling behavior with an exponent ν = 0.54, similar to the Flory exponent ν = 3/5 of a polymer in a good solvent [43]. In contrast, Rg of the DNA inside a condensate exhibits different scaling behavior with ν = 0.36, which is close to the exponent ν = 1/3 of a collapsed polymer in a poor solvent [43]. Using these results, we can explain the difference between the contact maps shown in Fig.4. In the absence of condensation, the looped polymer behaves as a random coil favoring short range contacts. Indeed, the contact probability decreases for increasing distance along the polymer, giving rise to the short ranged contact maps shown in Fig.4, middle. For a loop inside the condensate, the contact probability remains high, giving rise to the longer ranged contact map. We use a simple argument for the scaling of the contact probability P ∼ s−κ as a function of the DNA length s between the contacts points. Assuming a probability of contacts proportional to the squared density, we have P (s) ∼

Rg3

∼ s−2(3ν−1) .

The Flory exponent of ν = 3/5 for a good solvent implies κ = 8/5 while for a poor solvent ν = 1/3 leads to κ = 0. We tested this scaling argument in our simulation. Fig.5c (top) shows P (s) for a loop without condensate. We find κ ≃ 1.21, which is in good agreement with the estimate κ = 1.24 using κ = 6ν −2 with ν = 0.54 (Fig.5b, top). For loop extrusion with condensation, we obtained κ ≃ 0.63 (Fig.5c, bottom). This is longer ranged as compared to the case without condensate, but deviates from the estimate κ = 0.16 using ν = 0.36 (Fig.5b, bottom). This difference may stem from finite-size and finite-time effects in our simulations. However, the change of the exponents for loops with (κ = 0.63) and without conden-

[1] K. Nasmyth and C. H. Haering, Cohesin: its roles and mechanisms, Annual review of genetics 43, 525 (2009). [2] E. Kim, R. Barth, and C. Dekker, Looping the genome with smc complexes, Annual Review of Biochemistry 92 [3] I. F. Davidson and J.-M. Peters, Genome folding through loop extrusion by smc complexes, Nature reviews Molec-

sation (κ = 1.21) is significant, and highlights the longer range contacts in a condensed DNA loop. In summary, we investigated the interplay between DNA loop extrusion and DNA-protein co-condensation. We found that loop extrusion stabilises DNA-protein cocondensation under tension and positions the condensate on DNA. We identified a regime of loop limited condensates, where condensates size is set by the DNA loop size. Our work shows that by combining loop extrusion and condensation, a DNA organization with the characteristics of TADs naturally emerges. In the absence of the condensation, the resulting contact maps remain Condensate

LE only

LE and Condensate

FIG. 4. Contact maps obtained in simulations for only condensation (left), only loop extrusion (middle), and both loop extrusion and condensation (right) as a function of DNA particle indices i and j. Contact maps are presented for Lend = 4, 8, 12 μm (top to bottom). The contact probability between particle i and j is shown as a color code. The fraction I of contacts, defined as the sum of the all contact probabilities normalized by the total number of pairs (16502 ), is given.

short ranged. The condensation facilitates the close contacts of distant DNA segments within the TAD. Our work underscores chromatin organization in the nucleus may emerge from the interplay between loop extrusion and protein-DNA co-condensation.

ular cell biology 22, 445 (2021). [4] S. Yatskevich, J. Rhodes, and K. Nasmyth, Organization of chromosomal dna by smc complexes, Annual review of genetics 53, 445 (2019). [5] C. Hoencamp and B. D. Rowland, Genome control by smc complexes, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 1 (2023).

[Page 5]

FIG. 5. (a) Representative snapshots showing a DNA loop without condensation (left) and a DNA-Protein condensate containing the DNA loop (right). Yellow and blue particles indicate the DNA strand and SMC binding site on DNA, respectively. Protein particles are not shown to emphasize the DNA structure. Lend = 6 μm. (b) Radius of gyration Rg of DNA loops without condensation as a function loop length LA (top, ν ≃ 0.54) and of DNA within a condensate as a function of condensed DNA length Ld (bottom, ν ≃ 0.36). The data is fit using Rg ∼ Lν (solid lines). (c) Probability of contact, P , as a function of the DNA length between contacts, s, for different Lend for loop extrusion without condensation (top, κ = 1.21) and for loop extrusion with condensation (bottom, κ = 0.63). The data is fit using P ∼ s−κ (solid lines). The reported values of κ are the mean value of the exponents for different Lend fit in the range 5 · 10−2 μm < s < 3 μm. [6] T. Terakawa, S. Bisht, J. M. Eeftens, C. Dekker, C. H. Haering, and E. C. Greene, The condensin complex is a mechanochemical motor that translocates along dna, Science 358, 672 (2017). [7] M. Ganji, I. A. Shaltiel, S. Bisht, E. Kim, A. Kalichava, C. H. Haering, and C. Dekker, Real-time imaging of dna loop extrusion by condensin, Science 360, 102 (2018). [8] S. Golfier, T. Quail, H. Kimura, and J. Brugués, Cohesin and condensin extrude dna loops in a cell cycle-dependent manner, Elife 9, e53885 (2020). [9] E. Kim, A. M. Gonzalez, B. Pradhan, J. van der Torre, and C. Dekker, Condensin-driven loop extrusion on supercoiled dna, Nature Structural & Molecular Biology 29, 719 (2022). [10] E. Kim, J. Kerssemakers, I. Shaltiel, C. Haering, and C. Dekker, Dna-loop extruding condensin complexes can traverse one another, Biophysical Journal 118, 380a [11] B. Pradhan, T. Kanno, M. Umeda Igarashi, M. S. Loke, M. D. Baaske, J. S. K. Wong, K. Jeppsson, C. Björkegren, and E. Kim, The smc5/6 complex is a dna loop-extruding motor, Nature , 1 (2023). [12] I. F. Davidson, B. Bauer, D. Goetz, W. Tang, G. Wutz, and J.-M. Peters, Dna loop extrusion by human cohesin,

Science 366, 1338 (2019). [13] Y. Kim, Z. Shi, H. Zhang, I. J. Finkelstein, and H. Yu, 1.21 ± 0.12 Human cohesin compacts dna by loop extrusion, Science 0.63 ± 0.02 1345 (2019). [14] J.-K. Ryu, S.-H. Rah, R. Janissen, J. W. Kerssemakers, A. Bonato, D. Michieletto, and C. Dekker, Condensin extrudes dna loops in steps up to hundreds of base pairs that are generated by atp binding events, Nucleic acids research 50, 820 (2022). [15] B. Pradhan, R. Barth, E. Kim, I. F. Davidson, B. Bauer, T. van Laar, W. Yang, J.-K. Ryu, J. van der Torre, J.M. Peters, et al., Smc complexes can traverse physical roadblocks bigger than their ring size, Cell reports 41 [16] J.-K. Ryu, A. J. Katan, E. O. van der Sluis, T. Wisse, R. de Groot, C. H. Haering, and C. Dekker, The condensin holocomplex cycles dynamically between open and collapsed states, Nature structural & molecular biology 27, 1134 (2020). [17] G. Shi, L. Liu, C. Hyeon, and D. Thirumalai, Interphase human chromosome exhibits out of equilibrium glassy dynamics, Nature communications 9, 3161 (2018). [18] R. Takaki, A. Dey, G. Shi, and D. Thirumalai, Theory and simulations of condensin mediated loop extrusion in dna, Nature Communications 12, 5865 (2021). [19] E. J. Banigan and L. A. Mirny, Limits of chromosome compaction by loop-extruding motors, Physical Review X 9, 031007 (2019). [20] E. J. Banigan and L. A. Mirny, Loop extrusion: theory meets single-molecule experiments, Current opinion in cell biology 64, 124 (2020). [21] E. J. Banigan and L. A. Mirny, The interplay between asymmetric and symmetric dna loop extrusion, Elife 9, e63528 (2020). [22] B. Chan and M. Rubinstein, Theory of chromatin organization maintained by active loop extrusion, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, e2222078120 [23] J. F. Marko, P. De Los Rios, A. Barducci, and S. Gruber, Dna-segment-capture model for loop extrusion by structural maintenance of chromosome (smc) protein complexes, Nucleic acids research 47, 6956 (2019). [24] A. Bonato and D. Michieletto, Three-dimensional loop extrusion, Biophysical Journal 120, 5544 (2021). [25] B. Chan and M. Rubinstein, Activity-driven chromatin organization during interphase: compaction, segregation, and entanglement suppression, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121, e2401494121 (2024). [26] I. F. Davidson, R. Barth, M. Zaczek, J. van der Torre, W. Tang, K. Nagasaka, R. Janissen, J. Kerssemakers, G. Wutz, C. Dekker, et al., Ctcf is a dna-tensiondependent barrier to cohesin-mediated loop extrusion, Nature , 1 (2023). [27] D. Jeong, G. Shi, X. Li, and D. Thirumalai, Structural basis for the preservation of a subset of topologically associating domains in interphase chromosomes upon cohesin depletion, Elife 12, RP88564 (2024). [28] W. Schwarzer, N. Abdennur, A. Goloborodko, A. Pekowska, G. Fudenberg, Y. Loe-Mie, N. A. Fonseca, W. Huber, C. H. Haering, L. Mirny, et al., Two independent modes of chromatin organization revealed by cohesin removal, Nature 551, 51 (2017). [29] G. Fudenberg, M. Imakaev, C. Lu, A. Goloborodko, N. Abdennur, and L. A. Mirny, Formation of chromo-

[Page 6]

somal domains by loop extrusion, Cell reports 15, 2038 [30] E. J. Banigan, W. Tang, A. A. van den Berg, R. R. Stocsits, G. Wutz, H. B. Brandão, G. A. Busslinger, J.-M. Peters, and L. A. Mirny, Transcription shapes 3d chromatin organization by interacting with loop extrusion, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, e2210480120 (2023). [31] A. Dey, G. Shi, R. Takaki, and D. Thirumalai, Structural changes in chromosomes driven by multiple condensin motors during mitosis, Cell Reports 42 (2023). [32] A. A. Hyman, C. A. Weber, and F. Jülicher, Liquid-liquid phase separation in biology, Annual review of cell and developmental biology 30, 39 (2014). [33] K. Rippe, Liquid–liquid phase separation in chromatin, Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 14, a040683 [34] J. T. King and A. Shakya, Phase separation of dna: From past to present, Biophysical Journal 120, 1139 (2021). [35] K. Shrinivas, B. R. Sabari, E. L. Coffey, I. A. Klein, A. Boija, A. V. Zamudio, J. Schuijers, N. M. Hannett, P. A. Sharp, R. A. Young, and A. K. Chakraborty, Enhancer features that drive formation of transcriptional condensates, Molecular Cell 75, 549 (2019). [36] M.-T. Wei, Y.-C. Chang, S. F. Shimobayashi, Y. Shin, A. R. Strom, and C. P. Brangwynne, Nucleated transcriptional condensates amplify gene expression, Nature cell biology 22, 1187 (2020). [37] J. E. Henninger, O. Oksuz, K. Shrinivas, I. Sagi, G. LeRoy, M. M. Zheng, J. O. Andrews, A. V. Zamudio, C. Lazaris, N. M. Hannett, et al., Rna-mediated feedback control of transcriptional condensates, Cell 184, 207 [38] J. A. Morin, S. Wittmann, S. Choubey, A. Klosin, S. Golfier, A. A. Hyman, F. Jülicher, and S. W. Grill, Sequence-dependent surface condensation of a pioneer transcription factor on dna, Nature Physics 18, 271 [39] R. Renger, J. A. Morin, R. Lemaitre, M. RuerGruss, F. Jülicher, A. Hermann, and S. W. Grill, Cocondensation of proteins with single-and double-stranded dna, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

119, e2107871119 (2022). [40] J.-U. Sommer, H. Merlitz, and H. Schiessel, Polymerassisted condensation: A mechanism for heterochromatin formation and epigenetic memory, Macromolecules 55, 4841 (2022). [41] A. Panigrahi and B. W. O’Malley, Mechanisms of enhancer action: the known and the unknown, Genome biology 22, 108 (2021). [42] T. Quail, S. Golfier, M. Elsner, K. Ishihara, V. Murugesan, R. Renger, F. Jülicher, and J. Brugués, Force generation by protein–dna co-condensation, Nature Physics 17, 1007 (2021). [43] M. Rubinsten, Polymer physics (United States of America, 2003). [44] M. Gabriele, H. B. Brandão, S. Grosse-Holz, A. Jha, G. M. Dailey, C. Cattoglio, T.-H. S. Hsieh, L. Mirny, C. Zechner, and A. S. Hansen, Dynamics of ctcf-and cohesin-mediated chromatin looping revealed by live-cell imaging, Science 376, 496 (2022). [45] E. Lieberman-Aiden, N. L. Van Berkum, L. Williams, M. Imakaev, T. Ragoczy, A. Telling, I. Amit, B. R. Lajoie, P. J. Sabo, M. O. Dorschner, et al., Comprehensive mapping of long-range interactions reveals folding principles of the human genome, science 326, 289 (2009). [46] G. Shi and D. Thirumalai, Conformational heterogeneity in human interphase chromosome organization reconciles the fish and hi-c paradox, Nature communications 10, 3894 (2019). [47] G. Shi and D. Thirumalai, A maximum-entropy model to predict 3d structural ensembles of chromatin from pairwise distances with applications to interphase chromosomes and structural variants, Nature Communications 14, 1150 (2023). [48] G. Shi and D. Thirumalai, From hi-c contact map to three-dimensional organization of interphase human chromosomes, Physical Review X 11, 011051 (2021). [49] S. Shin, G. Shi, and D. Thirumalai, From effective interactions extracted using hi-c data to chromosome structures in conventional and inverted nuclei, PRX Life 1, 013010 (2023).

[Page 7]

Supplementary Information: Active Loop Extrusion guides DNA-Protein Condensation Ryota Takaki,1 Yahor Savich,1, 2 Jan Brugués,1, 2, 3, 4, ∗ and Frank Jülicher1, 3, 4, †

arXiv:2407.03109v1 [physics.bio-ph] 3 Jul 2024

Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics (MPI-CBG), Dresden, Germany Center for Systems Biology Dresden, Dresden, Germany Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany

I.

LANGEVIN DYANMICS SIMULATIONS

Our simulation is comprised of three types of particle: 1650 DNA particles, 5000 protein particles, and 20 SMC particles. The equation of motion of the particles is given by Langevin equation,

dvi = −∇U − mγvi + ξ. dt

(S1)

Here m is the mass of the particles, U is the potential energy, γ is the friction coefficient (inverse time unit), vi is the velocity of ith particle, and ξ is the delta correlated noise satisfying the fluctuation dissipation relation. The potential energy U is given by the contributions: U = ULJ + UFENE + UANG , where ULJ (Lennard-Jones potential), UFENE (Finitely Extensible Nonlinear Elastic potential), and UANG (angular potential). We employ the Lennard-Jones potential to simulate attraction and soft repulsion interactions between DNA-Protein, Protein-Protein, and DNA-SMC. The potential is defined as: ULJ (ri,j ) = 4εαi ,αj

σ 6 − ∆αi ,αj Θ(rc − ri,j ). ri,j ri,j

(S2)

In this expression, ε and σ denote the strength and range of the interaction, respectively. The indices αi and αj specify the types of particles (DNA, Protein, or SMC) for particles i and j. The function Θ is the Heaviside step function, introducing a cut-off at rc = 5σ. The strength and combination among different particle types in the Lennard-Jone potential are determined by the matrix ε and ∆, respectively.   εDNA,DNA εDNA,PRO εDNA,SMC (εαi αj ) =  εDNA,PRO εPRO,PRO εPRO,SMC  εDNA,SMC εPRO,SMC εSMC,SMC

(S3)

  0 1 1 (∆αi αj ) = 1 1 0 1 0 0

(S4)

(ri,i+1 − ri,i+1 )2 i UFENE (ri,i+1 ) = − kF RF2 log 1 − , RF2

(S5)

To maintain the connectivity of DNA particles, we utilize the Finitely Extensible Nonlinear Elastic potential:

where kF is the stiffness of the potential, RF denotes the maximum allowable displacement, and ri,i+1 is the equilibrium distance between adjacent particles i and i + 1, set to ri,i+1 = σ. We set kF = 30ε/σ and RF = 1.5σ.

∗ Electronic address: jan.brugues@tu-dresden.de † Electronic address: julicher@pks.mpg.de

[Page 8]

To accurately model the stiffness of DNA, we apply the angular potential: UANG (θk ) = εb (1 + cos θk ),

(S6)

where εb is the energy scale for bending. It is related to the polymer’s persistence length by εb = kB T lp /σ [? ]. Modeling loop extrusion. To simulate the non-equilibrium, active loop extrusion (LE) process, we initiate a DNA loop upon the binding of an SMC particle to a DNA particle. This binding and subsequent loop formation are governed by the activation and deactivation of breakable harmonic potentials. The binding potential between SMC and DNA is described as:

USMC,DNA (ri,j ) = −εSMC,DNA log 1 + e− 2 kSMC,DNA (ri,j −σ) , (S7)

where εSMC,DNA and kSMC,DNA are the strength and stiffness of the potential, respectively. The loop extrusion potential is given by:

ULP (ri,j ) = −εLP log 1 + e− 2 kLP (ri,j −σ) , (S8)

with εLP and kLP being the corresponding strength and stiffness parameters. The loop extrusion process implemented as sequence of events, divided in three steps: 1. SMC binding, 2. Loop extrusion 3. End of the loop extrusion. Each of these steps contains three subsequent substeps as follows 1. SMC binding to DNA

(a) SMC binds to a DNA particle when the distance between them is less than the cutoff distance of 1.5σ. Assume SMC binds at DNA index iSMC . (b) Activate the binding potential USMC,DNA between SMC and DNA, with parameters kSMC,DNA = 0.005(kB T /nm2 ) and εSMC,DNA = 100(kB T ). Deactivate the attractive interaction in ULJ between SMC and DNA. (c) Activate the first cross-link potential ULP,1 between iSMC and DNA particle at iSMC ± i0 (where i0 = 10 is the initial loop size), in a randomly chosen loop extrusion direction (±). Also, activate the second potential ULP,2 between iSMC and iSMC ± i0 ± 1 in the chosen extrusion direction. Initial parameters for ULP are εLP = 100(kB T ) and kLP = 0.001(kB T /nm2 ). 2. Loop extrusion (a) Move ULP,1 to the pair of beads iSMC ± 1 and iSMC ∓ i0 ∓ 2. Simulate for nLE /2 steps, where 1/nLE defines the loop extrusion speed. We set nLE = 106 in order for a maximum steps in the simulation to be 100 loop extrusion steps (∼ 4μm DNA loop). Parameters for ULP remain the same. (b) Move ULP,2 to the pair iSMC ± 2 and iSMC ∓ i0 ∓ 3. Simulate for another nLE /2 steps. Parameters for ULP are unchanged. (c) Continue (a) and (b) until SMC unbinds from DNA, the loop breaks, or the loop extrusion reaches the determined end of DNA. 3. End of the loop extrusion (a) Unbinding of SMC from DNA. If the distance between SMC and SMC bound DNA becomes greater than some threshold distance d = 100σ, then stop the loop extrusion by removing USMC,DNA , ULP,1 and ULP,2 . (b) Breaks of the loop. If the distance between DNA particles associated with ULP,1 or ULP,2 becomes greater than some threshold distance d = 100σ, then stop the loop extrusion by removing USMC,DNA , ULP,1 and ULP,2 . (c) Loop extrusion reaches to the determined end of DNA. Once the loop extrusion reaches to the end position, stop updating the position of ULP,1 and ULP,2 . In the Langevin dynamics simulation we use the reduced units, m=

kB T τ 2 ; σ2

τ = 1/γ,

(S9)

where τ is the unit time in our simulation and γ = 0.01 ns−1 . We performed Langevin dynamics simulations using the openMM software package [? ] with the time step ∆t = 0.01τ . Simulations were carried out in a rectangular box with dimensions 2μm × 2μm × 15μm, implementing periodic boundary conditions.

[Page 9]

Parameter

Meaning

Value

εDNA,DNA DNA-DNA interaction for LJ potential 1 kB T εSMC,SMC LEF-LEF interaction for LJ potential 1 kB T εSMC,DNA LEF-DNA interaction for LJ potential 10 kB T εPRO,PRO Protein-Protein interaction for LJ potential 2 kB T εDNA,PRO DNA-Protein interaction for LJ potential Same as εPRO,PRO Size of a particle 10 nm εb Energy scale for angle potential 5 kB T TABLE I: List of parameters and the values of the potential chosen in the molecular dynamics simulation.

II.

CONDENSATE GROWTH AND OSTWALT RIPENING UNDER DNA TENSION

We here discuss the dynamics of condensate growth under the tension on DNA, which leads to the enhanced Ostwalt ripening. Let us consider the situation in Fig.3a in the main text where a condensate is located outside the DNA loop. We define the difference of the chemical potential (∆μ) between the condensate (μd ) and the stretched DNA (μp ), ∆μ ≡ σ

∂∆Fa (Ld , LA , Lend , Lc ) = μd (Ld ) − μp (Ld , LA , Lend , Lc ), ∂Ld

(S10)

where μd (Ld ) ≡ σ

∂Fd (Ld ) 8π 3α 2/3 −1/3 Ld = σ −vα + γ ∂Ld 3 4π

(S11)

and μp (Ld , LA , Lend , Lc ) ≡ −σ

∂Fp (Ld , Lend , Lc − LA ) kB T L2end 2L2end =σ − + . ∂Ld 4lp (Lend + Ld + LA − Lc )2 (Ld + LA − Lc )2 (S12)

Here σ is the length of a DNA segment which is set to 1 for simplicity. To investigate the dynamics of the condensate growth, let us write, (S13)

L̇d = −γ∆μ,

where γ is a motility coefficient. The equilibrium is given by the condition ∆μ = 0. Eq.S13 has two fixed points for Ld corresponding to the two stages of the condensate growth. First stage is the initial nucleation of protein-DNA condensate and the second stage is the growth of the condensate by further inclusion of DNA into the condensate. The first process is approximately independent to the DNA tension while the second process is tension dependent. To illustrate the two fixed points, we start by obtaining the positions of the two fixed points. The first fixed point corresponds the initial nucleation of the condensate, which is approximately obtained by vα − γ

8π 3α 2/3 −1/3 Ld = 0. 3 4π

(S14)

This fixed points is unstable. The condensates smaller than the critical size diminish while the condensates larger than the critical size grow. See Fig.S1a. The second fixed point corresponds to the condensate growth by the inclusion of DNA, which is approximately given by

vα −

kB T 4lp

L2end 2L2end + (Lend + Ld + LA − Lc ) (Ld + LA − Lc )2

= 0.

(S15)

This fixed point is stable, see Fig.S1b. Therefore the dynamics of condensate growth, Eq.S13, has two fixed points, one is unstable and the other is stable (Fig.S1c). The effect of the DNA loop, LA , has significant effect to the dynamics of the condensate growth. High

[Page 10]

values of LA lead to the loss of the fixed points rendering any formation of condensates outside the loop unstable (Fig.S1c, see the loss of the intersection at L̇d /γ = 0 for the high values of LA ). Therefore when the condensate within DNA loop and outside the DNA loop coexist, the condensate outside loop tends to diminish for high LA . In turn, the condensate inside the loop, which is stable, should grow instead. Thus the tension along DNA (DNA loop by loop extrusion process in our study) accelerates the dynamics of Ostwalt ripening of condensate within the DNA loop.

FIG. S1: (a) The first fixed point obtained from Eq.S14. The red dot indicates the unstable fixed point and the arrows are the direction of the evolution of Ld . (b) The second fixed point obtained from Eq.S15. The blue dot indicates an example of stable fixed point for a value of LA . The arrows are the direction of the evolution of Ld . The color bar shows the values of the DNA loop length LA due to the loop extrusion process. (c) The dynamics of the condensate growth from Eq.S13. The red and blue dots are the unstable and stable fixed points, respectively.

III.

PROBABILITY OF CONDENSATE FORMATION

We can compute the probability of the condensation using the obtained free energies. We first computed the probability density creating DNA-protein co-condensates as a function of Ld . For the scenario Fig.3a in the main text, e−β∆Fa (Ld ) , Pa (Ld ) = R Lmax dLd e−β∆Fa (Ld )

(S16)

where Lmax = Lc − Lend − LA . The probability density has either single or double peaks (Ld = 0 and Ld > 0) depending on the parameters. The probability of the condensate formation was determined as the fraction of the peak value located at Ld > 0 to the sum of the peak values at Ld = 0 and Ld > 0. IV.

ANALYSIS OF SIMULATION DATA

Condensate detection

For the identification of condensates within our simulation trajectories, we employed Density-based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN [? ]). DBSCAN operates based on two key parameters: the distance threshold ε and the minimum number of points required to constitute a dense region, denoted as minPts. In our analysis, we configured these parameters to ε = 20 nm and minPts = 30. By applying DBSCAN to the particle coordinates from the simulation trajectories, we define regions classified as condensates.

Contact Maps

To construct the contact map, we analyzed the last 1000 frames of the simulation, averaging the data across three distinct ensembles for each parameter set. A contact is defined as occurring when two particles are within 30nm of each other. The metric I is calculated as the values in the contact map normalized by the total number of possible interactions (16502 ).
